'08 CHAPTER 4
1774
The First Continental
Congress
meets.
1775 The
Revolutionary War begins with the fighting at Lexington and Concord.

	
	7”*w
Jk	Jefferson Writes
	the Declaration of
HISTORY
Independence 7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
VIDEO

■■
Soldiers fight with single-shot muskets in this re-enactment of a battle during the Revolutionary War.
1 .

1776 On July 4 the thirteen colonies issue the Declaration of Independence and break away from Great Britain.
1778 France allies with the Americans and joins the war against Great Britain.
1781
The British surrender to
George Washington at Yorktown.
1779 Spain declares war against Great Britain
1783 The Treaty of Paris is signed, ending the war.
1783 Simon Bolivar is born in present-day Venezuela.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 109
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Society	Science and
Politics	and Culture	Technology
FOCUS on Themes In this chapter you will read about the events of the Revolutionary War, the war by which the United States won its independence. You will learn about some of the major battles that occurred between the American colonists and the
British army and how geography sometimes affected their outcomes. You will also read the Declaration of Independence, one of the most important political documents in all of American history.
J
Main Ideas in Social Studies
FOCUS
On Reading When you are reading, it is not always necessary to remember every tiny detail of the text. Instead, what you want to remember are the main ideas, the most important concepts around which the text is based. Identifying Main Ideas Most paragraphs in history books include main ideas. Sometimes the main idea is stated clearly in a single sentence. At other times, the main idea is suggested, not stated. However, that idea still shapes the paragraph's content and the meaning of all of the facts and details in it.
Topic: The paragraph is about the pamphlet Common Sense by Thomas Paine.
News of the work spread throughout the colonies, eventually sell-} ing some 500,000 copies. Paine reached a wide audience by writing as a common person speaking to common people. Common Sense changed the way many colonists viewed their king. (p. 118)
Facts and Details:
•	Many people from different colonies read the pamphlet.
•	Common Sense eventually sold 500,000 copies.
•	Thomas Paine's writing style was easy for the common people to read.
Steps in Identifying Main Ideas
I
I.Read the paragraph. Ask yourself, "What is this paragraph mostly i about?" This will be the topic of the paragraph.
2.	List the important facts and details S that relate to that topic.
3.	Ask yourself, "What seems to be the most important point
I the writer is making about the I topic?" Or ask, "If the writer
could say only one thing about this paragraph, what would it be?" This is the main idea of the paragraph.
I
Main Idea: The pamphlet Common Sense shaped the way some colonists thought about their rulers.
”10 CHAPTER 4
From
Chapter 4, p. 139
I
You Try It!
The following passage is from the chapter you are about to read.
Read it and then answer the questions below.
The Treaty of Paris
After Yorktown, only a few small battles took place. Lacking the money to pay for a new army Great Britain entered into peace talks with America. Benjamin Franklin had a key role in the negotiations.
Delegates took more than two years to come to a peace agreement. In the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States. The treaty also set America's borders. A separate treaty between Britain and Spain returned Florida to the Spanish. British leaders also accepted American rights to settle and trade west of the original thirteen colonies.
..............	................. ........... J
After you have read the passage, answer the following questions.
1.	The main idea of the second paragraph is stated in a sentence. Which sentence expresses the main idea?
2.	What is the first paragraph about? What facts and details are included in the paragraph? Based on your answers to these questions, what is the main idea of the first paragraph? Use appropriate academic and social studies vocabulary words in your main idea sentence.
3.	With a partner, discuss the main idea you each wrote down. Use your partner's main idea to further understand the paragraphs and to confirm your own interpretation of the main ideas.
Chapter 4
Section 1
First Continental
Congress (p. 112)
Patriots (p. 113) minutemen (p. 114)
Redcoats (p. 114)
Second Continental
Congress (p. 114)
Continental Army (p. 114)
George Washington (p. 114)
Battle of Bunker Hill (p. 115)
Section 2
Common Sense (p. 118)
Thomas Paine (p. 118)
Declaration of
Independence (p. 119)
Thomas Jefferson (p. 119)
Loyalists (p. 119)
Section 3
mercenaries (p. 128)
Battle of Trenton (p.129)
Battle of Saratoga (p. 130)
Marquis de Lafayette (p. 131)
Baron Friedrich von Steuben (p. 131) Bernardo de Galvez (p. 131)
John Paul Jones (p. 133)
George Rogers Clark (p. 133)
Section 4
Francis Marion (p. 136)
Comte de Rochambeau (p. 137) Battle of Yorktown (p. 137)
Treaty of Paris of 1783 (p. 139)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
reaction (p. 114) strategy (p. 129)
l
As you read Chapter 4, identify the main ideas of the paragraphs you are reading.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 111
What You Will Learn...
The Revolution Begins
If YOU were there...
1.	The First Continental Congress demanded certain rights from Great Britain.
2.	Armed conflict between British soldiers and colonists broke out with the "shot heard 'round the world."
3.	The Second Continental Congress created the Continental Army to fight the British.
4.	In two early battles, the army lost control of Boston but then regained it.
u
You are a member of the British Parliament in the 1770s. Some members say that the Americans are defying the king. Others point out that the colonists are British citizens who have certain rights. Now the king must decide to punish the rebellious colonists or listen to their complaints.
What advice would you give the king?
^^^STheBigldea^^^B
The tensions between the ; colonies and Great Britain led to ■ armed conflict in 1775.
............................. -J
Key Terms and People
First Continental Congress, p. 112 Patriots, p. 113 minutemen, p. 114 Redcoats, p. 114
Second Continental Congress, p. 114 Continental Army, p. 114 George Washington, p. 114 Battle of Bunker Hill, p. 115
hmhsocialstudies.com
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the events that occurred in the early days of the American Revolution.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
Taxes and harsh new laws led some , | colonists to protest againstthe British. In some places, the protests I turned violent. The British government refused to listen, ignoring the I colonists'demands for more rights. That setthe stage for war.
First Continental Congress
To many colonists the closing of Boston Harbor was the final insult in a long list of abuses. In response to the mounting crisis, all the colonies except Georgia sent representatives to a meeting in October 1774. This meeting, known as the First Continental Congress, was a gathering of colonial leaders who were deeply troubled about the relationship between Great Britain and its colonies in America. At Carpenters' Hall in Philadelphia, the leaders remained locked in weeks of intense debate. Patrick Henry and others believed that violence was unavoidable. On the other hand, delegates from Pennsylvania and New York had strict orders to seek peace.
Wisely, the delegates compromised. They encouraged colonists to continue boycotting British goods but told colonial militias to prepare for war. Meanwhile, they drafted the Declaration of Rights, a list of 10 resolutions to be presented to King George III. Included was the colonists' right to "life, liberty, and property."
The First Continental Congress did not seek a separation from Britain. Its goal was to state the colonists' concerns and ask the king to correct the problems. But before they left Philadelphia, the delegates agreed to meet in 1775 if the king refused their petition.
Patrick Henry returned from the Congress and reported to his fellow Virginians. To encourage them to support the Patriot cause,
CHAPTER 4
Henry voiced these famous words:
’They tell us, Sir, that we are weak; unable to cope with so formidable an adversary. But when will we be stronger? Gentlemen may cry, Peace, Peace—but there is no peace. I know not what course others may take; but as for me, give me liberty or give me death/^

—Patrick Henry, quoted in Eyewitnesses and Others
In time many colonists came to agree with Henry. They became known as Patriots—colonists who chose to fight for independence from Great Britain.
Identifying Cause and Effect
Why did the delegates attend the First Continental Congress? What were the results?
Reading Check .
'Shot Heard 'round the World"
The Continental Congress planned to meet again in 1775. Before it could, the situation in the colonies had changed— for the worse.
The Ride of Paul Revere
British military leaders in the colonies grew uneasy when local militias seemed to be preparing for action. The governor of Massachusetts, Thomas Gage, learned that a stockpile of weapons was stored in Concord, about 20 miles from Boston. In April 1775 he decided to seize the supplies.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 113
Academic
Vocabulary
reaction
response
Gage thought he had kept his plan a secret. However, Boston was full of spies for the Patriot cause. They noticed the British were preparing for action and quickly informed the Patriots. Unsure of how the British would strike, Sons of Liberty member Paul Revere enlisted the aid of Robert Newman. Newman was to climb into the steeple of the Old North Church and watch for British soldiers. If they advanced across land, Newman would display one lantern from the steeple. If they rowed across the Charles River, Newman would display two lanterns.
When Revere and fellow Patriot William Dawes saw two lights shine, they set off on horseback. Using two different routes out of Boston, they sounded the alert. As the riders advanced, drums and church bells called out the local militia, or minutemen—who got their name because they were ready to fight at a minute's notice. Another rider, a free African American named Wentworth Cheswell, rode north to New Hampshire and Maine to gather reinforcements.
Battles at Lexington and Concord
At dawn on April 19, the British troops arrived at the town of Lexington, near Concord and about 15 miles from Boston, where 70 armed minutemen waited. Patriot captain John Parker yelled to his troops, "Don't fire unless fired upon." Suddenly a shot rang out. To this day, no one knows who fired this "shot heard 'round the world."
The battle at Lexington ended in minutes with only a few volleys fired. When the smoke cleared, 8 of the badly outnumbered minutemen lay dead, and 10 were wounded. The British, with only one soldier wounded, marched on to Concord.
Although Revere had been arrested, the citizens of Concord were warned by another rider, Samuel Prescott. Most of the weapons in Concord had already been hidden, but the few that were left were now concealed. Some of the British troops, frustrated because the stockpile had disappeared, set fire to a
few buildings. In reaction the minutemen charged forward.
For the skilled colonial marksmen of Concord, the British soldiers made an easy target. They were wearing the British military uniform with its bright red jacket. For some time the colonists had called the British soldiers Redcoats because of these jackets. The British were forced to retreat to Boston, suffering many casualties along the way.
Reading Check
Drawing Inferences Why did the Patriots need several riders? Why did they take different routes?
Second Continental
Congress
King George III had refused to address the concerns listed in the Declaration of Rights. In May 1775, delegates from 12 colonies met again in Philadelphia for the Second Continental Congress. This second group of delegates from the colonies was still far from unified, but represented the first attempt at a Republican government in the colonies.
Some of the delegates called for a war, others for peace. Once again they compromised. Although the Congress did not openly revolt, delegates showed their growing dissatisfaction. They sent word to colonial authorities asking for new state constitutions. States set up conventions to write them. They also authorized the Massachusetts militia to become the Continental Army. This force would soon include soldiers from all colonies and would carry out the fight against Britain. Congress named a Virginian, George Washington, to command the army.
As Washington prepared for war, the Congress pursued peace. On July 5 the delegates signed the Olive Branch Petition as a final attempt to restore harmony. King George refused to read it. Instead, he looked for new ways to punish the colonies.
14 CHAPTER 4
READING CHECK
Summarizing What did the Second Continental Congress accomplish?
Early Battles
While the Congress discussed peace, the Massachusetts militia began to fight. Boston was a key city in the early days of the war. Both Patriots and the British fought to hold it.
Bunker Hill
Desperate for supplies, leaders in Boston sent Benedict Arnold and a force of 400 men to New York State. Their objective was to attack the British at Fort Ticonderoga. In May 1775, Arnold captured the fort and its large supply of weapons.
Meanwhile, the poorly supplied Patriots kept the British pinned down inside Boston. Although British leaders were trying to form a battle plan, they awoke on June 17 to a stunning sight. The colonial forces
had quietly dug in at Breed's Hill, a point overlooking north Boston. The Redcoats would have to cross Boston Harbor and fight their way uphill.
As the British force of 2,400 advanced, 1,600 militia members waited. Low on gunpowder, the commander ordered his troops not to fire "until you see the whites of their eyes." As they climbed the exposed hillside with their heavy packs, the British soldiers were cut down. Twice they retreated. Stepping over the dead and wounded, they returned for a third try. The colonists were now out of ammunition, and eventually they had to retreat.
This famous conflict is now known as the Battle of Bunker Hill, although it was actually launched from Breed's Hill. While the Patriots lost, they proved they could take on the Redcoats. For the British, the battle was a tragic victory. To win, they had sacrificed about double the number of Patriot soldiers.
Dorchester Heights
Shortly after the Battle of Bunker Hill, General Washington arrived in Boston to command the Continental Army. Washington knew that he would need heavier guns to drive the British out of Boston, and he knew where to get them—Fort Ticonderoga. Colonel Henry Knox was assigned to transport the captured cannons from Fort Ticonderoga to Boston. He successfully brought the heavy guns over 300 miles of rough terrain in the middle of winter. When Knox delivered the cannons, Washington was ready to regain control of Boston.
On March 4, 1776, Washington moved his army to Dorchester Heights, an area that overlooked Boston from the south. He stationed the cannons and his troops on Nook's Hill overlooking British general William Howe's position. When Howe awoke the next
morning and saw the Patriots' well-positioned artillery, he knew he would have to retreat. "The Rebels have done more in one night than my whole army could do in months," Howe declared. On March 7 Howe retreated from Boston to Canada. The birthplace of the rebellion was now in Patriot hands.
READING CHECK
Drawing Inferences Why
was the geography of the Boston area important in forming a battle plan?
I
Summary and Preview some colonial I leaders became convinced that they could not avoid war with Great Britain. In the next section you will read about another step toward war—the writing of the Declaration of Independence.
Section 1 Assessment

Ml
hmhsocialstudies.com
f
ONLINE QUIZ
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What was the First Continental Congress?
b.	Make Inferences Why did the First Continental Congress send the Declaration of Rights to the king?
c.	Elaborate Why did King George III refuse to consider the colonists'declaration?
2.	a. Identify Who warned the colonists of the British advance toward Lexington and Concord?
b.	Analyze Why did the British army march on Lexington and Concord?
c.	Elaborate What is meant by the expression "shot heard 'round the world"?
3.	a. Describe What was the purpose of the Second Continental Congress?
b.	Draw Conclusions Were the delegates to the Second Continental Congress ready to revolt against George III? Explain.
c.	Evaluate Defend George Ill's response to the Declaration of Rights and the Olive Branch Petition.
4.	a. Identify What leader captured Fort Ticonderoga?
b.	Draw Conclusions How was the Continental Army able to drive British forces out of Boston?
c.	Evaluate How would you evaluate the performance of the Continental Army in the early battles of the war? Explain.
Critical Thinking
5.	Categorizing Review your notes on the early battles of the Revolution. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to categorize events in the early days of the Revolution. Some events will be attempts at peace; others will be movement toward war.
Attempts at Peace	Movement toward War
	
6. Thinking about the Beginning You'll have about five minutes for your report and only a minute or twoto talk about the beginning of the war. What are the one or two most important things you want to say? Which ideas from your notes on class lectures might you include in your summary?
16 CHAPTER 4
Biography
George Washington
What would you do if you were asked
to lead a new country?
When did he live? 1732-1799
Where did he live? George Washington was a true American, born in the Virginia colony. As president, he lived in New York City and Philadelphia, the nation's first two capitals. When he retired, he returned to his plantation at Mount Vernon.
What did he do? Although Washington was a wealthy farmer, he spent most of his life in the military and in politics. Leading the colonial forces to victory in the Revolutionary War, he then helped shape the new government of the United States. On April 30, 1789, he was sworn in as the first president of the United States.
Why is he SO important? George Washington inspired Americans and helped to unite them. One
of his great accomplishments as president was to keep the peace with Britain and France. Upon
'' leaving the presidency, he urged Americans to avoid becoming politically divided.
KEY EVENTS
1775 Serves in Second Continental Congress; selected commander of the Continental Army
1789 Inaugurated as president
1793 Begins second term as president
1796 Publishes his Farewell Address and retires to his plantation at Mount Vernon
£ 1799 Dies at Mount Vernon; his will frees his slaves
Drawing Conclusions How might Washington's leadership in the Revolutionary War have prepared him for his role as president?

Mount Vernon was Washington's plantation.

1
.. r
2
i
SECTION
	
TEKS 1A,1C,4B,4C,15C,19A,
	20A, 25A
What You Will Learn... Y	
	
		\
1.	Thomas Paine's Common Sense led many colonists to support independence.
2.	Colonists had to choose sides when independence was declared.
3.	The Declaration of Independence did not address the rights of all colonists.
T
The colonies formally declared their independence from Great Britain.
Key Terms and People
Common Sense, p. 118 Thomas Paine,p. 118 Declaration of Independence, p. 119 Thomas Jefferson, p. 119 Loyalists, p. 119
hmhsocialstudies.com

Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the Declaration of Independence.
Declaring
Independence
If YOU were there...
You live on a farm in New York in 1776. The conflicts with the British have torn your family apart. Your father is loyal to King George and wants to remain British. But your mother is a fierce Patriot, and your brother wants to join the Continental Army. Your father and others who feel the same way are moving to British-held Canada. Now you must decide what you will do.
Would you go to Canada or support the Patriots?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The outbreak of violence at Lexington, Concord, and Boston took some colonists by surprise. Many, like the father above, opposed independence from Britain. Those who supported freedom began to promote their cause in many ways. Paine's Common Sense
"[There] is something very absurd in supporting a continent to be perpetually [forever] governed by an island." This plainspoken argument against British rule over America appeared in Common Sense, a 47-page pamphlet that was distributed in Philadelphia in January 1776. Common Sense was published anonymously—that is, without the author's name. The author, Thomas Paine, argued that citizens, not kings and queens, should make laws. At a time when monarchs ruled much of the world, this was a bold idea.
News of the work spread throughout the colonies, eventually selling some 500,000 copies. Paine reached a wide audience by writing as a common person speaking to common people. Common Sense changed the way many colonists viewed their king. It made a strong case for economic freedom and for the right to military self-defense. It cried out against tyranny—that is, the abuse of government power. Thomas Paine's words rang out in his time, and they have echoed throughout American history.
Supporting a Point of View Would you have agreed
with Thomas Paine? Explain.
READING CHECK
CHAPTER 4
Independence Is Declared
Many colonial leaders agreed with Paine. In June 1776 the Second Continental Congress began writing a document declaring independence. A committee also created a seal for the new country with the Latin motto "Epluribus unum” or "out of many, one." This motto recognized the new union of states.
A
New Philosophy of Government The Declaration of Independence formally announced the colonies' break from Great Britain. In doing so, it expressed three main ideas. First, Thomas Jefferson, the document's main author, argued that all people possess unalienable rights, or rights that are a natural part of being bom and cannot be taken away. These include the rights of "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Next, Jefferson listed the complaints of the colonists. He asserted that King George III had violated the colonists' rights by taxing them without their consent. Jefferson
accused the king of passing unfair laws and interfering with colonial governments. He also believed that stationing a large British army within the colonies was a burden.
Third, Jefferson stated that the colonies had the right to break from Britain. Influenced by the Enlightenment ideal of the social contract, he maintained that governments and rulers must protect the rights of citizens. In exchange, the people agree to be governed. Jefferson argued that King George III had broken the social contract.
On July 4,1776, the Continental Congress approved the Declaration of Independence. This act broke all ties to the British crown. The United States of America was bom.
Choosing Sides
The signing of the Declaration made the rebellion a full-scale revolt against Britain. Those who supported it would be considered traitors. Colonists who chose to side with the British were known as Loyalists—often called Tories.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
The Continental Congress voted for independence on July 2. However, because the Declaration was not approved until July 4, the fourth is celebrated today as Independence Day.

Primary Source
POINTS OF VIEW
Choosing Sides
When Ben Franklin's son William was a child, he helped his father experiment with lightning. But by the time William had grown and the Revolution started, the two men viewed the conflict differently. They exchanged letters on the subject.
//| am indeed of the opinion, that the parliament has no right to make any law whatever, binding on the colonies...
I know your sentiments differ from mine^ on these subjects. You are a thorough government man, which I do not wonder at, nor do I aim at converting you. I only wish you to act uprightly and steadily/^
—Benjamin Franklin,
quoted in The Writings of Benjamin Franklin Vol. Ill
tt I think that all laws until they are repealed ought t to be obeyed and that it is the duty of those k who are entrusted with the executive part of government to see that they
are so/^
William Franklin,
quoted in Benjamin and William Franklin by Sheila L. Skemp
How did the two men view the British government differently?
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 119
. Mi’
Signing the Declaration of Independence
' W*
■*K

hmhsocialstudies.com
Jefferson Writes . J the Declaration	Jk
of Independence HISTORY
Historians estimate that 40 to 45 percent of Americans were Patriots, while 20 to 30 percent were Loyalists. The rest were neutral.
Because of persecution by Patriots, more than 50,000 Loyalists fled the colonies during the Revolution. Most went to Canada, where Britain allowed them more self-rule after the Revolution. In doing so, they abandoned their homes and property. Divided allegiances tore apart families and friendships—even Benjamin Franklin became separated from his Loyalist son William.
Native Americans were at first encouraged by both sides to remain neutral. By the summer of 1776, however, both Patriots and the British were aggressively recruiting Indian fighters. Most sided with the British. In northern New York, four of the six Iroquois nations fought for the British. However, the Oneida and Tuscarora helped the Patriots, even delivering food to the soldiers at Valley Forge.
Drawing Conclusions Why
would Native Americans have lost out no matter who won the war?
READING CHECK
Unfinished Business
Today we recognize that the Declaration of Independence excluded many colonists. While it declared that "all men are created equal," the document failed to mention women, enslaved Africans, or Native Americans. The rights of these minorities would be subject to the rule of the majority.
Women
Although many women were Patriots, the Declaration did not address their rights. At least one delegate's wife, Abigail Adams, tried to influence her husband, John, to include women's rights in the Declaration. In a failed effort, she expressed her concerns:
^Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favorable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands... If particular care and attention is not paid to the Ladies we are and will not hold ourselves bound by Laws in which we have no voice, or Representation/^
—Abigail Adams, quoted in Notable American Women
10 CHAPTER 4
African and Native Americans
The Declaration did not recognize the rights of enslaved Africans, either. The authors had compared life under British rule to living as an enslaved people. The obvious question arose: Why did any form of slavery exist in a land that valued personal freedom? Even Thomas Jefferson, the main author of the Declaration, was a slaveholder.
In July 1776 slavery was legal in all the colonies. By the 1780s the New England colonies were taking steps to end slavery. Even so, the conflict over slavery continued long after the Revolutionary War.
The Declaration of Independence also did not address the rights of Native Americans to life, liberty, or property. Despite the Proclamation of 1763, American colonists had been quietly settling on lands that belonged to Native Americans. This tendency to disregard the rights of Native Americans would develop into a pattern after the colonists won their independence from Great Britain.
Reading Check
Finding Main Ideas What groups were unrepresented in the Declaration of Independence?
I SUMMARY AND PREVIEW
In 1776 the I colonists declared their independence. To achieve their goal, however, they would have to win a war against the British army. In the next section you will learn about some of the battles of the Revolutionary War. For a time, it seemed as if the British would defeat the colonists.

Section 2 Assessmen
ONLINE QUIZ
IS

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify Who was Thomas Paine?
b.	Make Inferences Why do you thinkThomas Paine originally published Common Sense anonymously?
c.	Elaborate Do you think that most colonists would have supported independence from Britain without Thomas Paine's publication of Common Sensei Explain.
2.	a. Identify What two sides emerged in response to the Declaration of Independence? What did each side favor?
b.	Explain What arguments did the authors of the Declaration of Independence give for declaring the colonies free from British control?
c.	Predict Define and give some examples of “unalienable rights." How might some groups use the Declaration of Independence in the future to gain rights?
3.	a. Identify Who urged her husband to "remember the ladies"?
b. Making Inferences Why did the authors of the Declaration of Independence fail to address the rights of women, Native Americans, and African Americans in the document?
Critical Thinking
4.	Analyzing Review your notes on the Declaration of Independence. Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to identify three results of the Declaration of Independence.
Declaration of		1. 2
Independence		3.
^WriteSmart
Gathering Ideas about the Declaration of Independence You are living at the time of the American Revolution. What is new and surprising about the colonists'actions? In one or two minutes, what is the most important thing you can say about the colonies'declaring independence?
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 121
’1
Thomas Jefferson wrote the first draft of the Declaration in a little more than two weeks. How is the Declaration's idea about why governments are formed still important to our country today?
EXPLORING
THEDOCUMENT
Vocabulary

impel force endowed provided
usurpations wrongful seizures of power evinces clearly displays	f
despotism unlimited power	|
tyranny oppressive power	|
exerted by a government	1
or ruler	I
candid fair	I
Here the Declaration lists the charges that the colonists had against King George III. How does the language in the list appeal to people's emotions?
EXPLORING
THEDOCUMENT
The Declaration
of Independence
In Congress, July 4,1776
The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America,
When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the Powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed, That whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide new Guards for their future security.—Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.
He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public good.
He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should be obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large districts of people, unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature, a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant from the depository of their Public Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.
He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be elected; whereby the Legislative Powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned to the People at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions within.
He has endeavored to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws of Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migration hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of Lands.
He has obstructed the Administration of Justice, by refusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary Powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people, and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies without the Consent of our legislature.
He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil Power.
He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended legislation:
For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from Punishment for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhabitants of these States:
j Vocabulary
relinquish release, yield inestimable priceless formidable causing dread annihilation destruction
convulsions violent disturbances
naturalization of foreigners
| the process by which | foreign-born persons | become citizens I appropriations of lands I setting aside land for I settlement I tenure term | a multitude of many | quartering lodging, housing
Mum Bett, a Massachusetts slave, believed that the words "all men are created equal" should apply to her and other enslaved Africans. She successfully sued for her freedom in 1781.
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:
For imposing taxes on us without our Consent:
For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury:
Vocabulary
arbitrary not based on law render make abdicated given up
foreign mercenaries
soldiers hired to fight for a country not their own perfidy violation of trust insurrections rebellions
petitioned for redress
asked formally for a correction of wrongs
unwarrantable jurisdiction
unjustified authority
magnanimity generous spirit
conjured urgently called upon
consanguinity common ancestry
acquiesce consent to
Here the Declaration calls the king a tyrant. What do you think tyrant means in this passage?
EXPLORING
THE DOCUMENT
For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offences:
For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighboring Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these Colonies:
For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable Laws, and altering fundamentally the Forms of our Governments:
For suspending our own Legislature, and declaring themselves invested with Power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and waging War against us.
He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.
He is at this time transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty & perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation.
He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high Seas to bear Arms against their Country, to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren, or to fall themselves by their Hands.
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavored to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.
In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free People.
Nor have We been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations, which, would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.
We, therefore, the Representatives of the united States of America, in General Congress, Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name, and by Authority of the good People of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do. And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the Protection of Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor.
[ Vocabulary
rectitude rightness
Here is where the document declares the independence of the colonies. Whose authority does the Congress use to declare independence?
EXPLORING
THEDOCUMENT
John Hancock Button Gwinnett Lyman Hall George Walton William Hooper Joseph Hewes John Penn Edward Rutledge Thomas Heyward, Jr. Thomas Lynch, Jr. Arthur Middleton
Samuel Chase
William Paca
Thomas Stone
Charles Carroll of Carrollton
George Wythe Richard Henry Lee Thomas Jefferson
Benjamin Harrison Thomas Nelson, Jr. Francis Lightfoot Lee Carter Braxton
Robert Morris Benjamin Rush Benjamin Franklin John Morton George Clymer James Smith George Taylor James Wilson George Ross Caesar Rodney George Read Thomas McKean William Floyd Philip Livingston Francis Lewis
Lewis Morris
Richard Stockton John Witherspoon Francis Hopkinson John Hart Abraham Clark Josiah Bartlett William Whipple Samuel Adams John Adams Robert Treat Paine Elbridge Gerry Stephen Hopkins William Ellery Roger Sherman Samuel Huntington William Williams
Oliver Wolcott
Matthew Thornton
EXPLORING
THE DOCUMENT
The Congress adopted the final draft of the Declaration of Independence on July 4,1776.
A formal copy, written on parchment paper, was signed on August 2,1776. From whom did the Declaration's signers receive their authority to declare independence?
The following is part of a
passage that the Congress removed from Jefferson's original draft: "He has waged cruel war against human nature itself, violating its most sacred rights of life and liberty in the persons of a distant people who never offended him, captivating and carrying them into slavery in another hemisphere, or to incur miserable death in their transportation thither."
Why do you think the Congress deleted this passage?

SECTION
3
TEKS 2A, 4B,4C, IOC, 22B, 25B
What You Will Learn...
Many Americans supported the war effort.
The Patriots both won and lost battles during the years 1775-1777.
France and Spain helped the Patriots fight the British.
The winter at Valley Forge tested the strength of Patriot troops.
The war continued at sea and in the West.
T
The Big Idea
Patriot forces faced many obstacles in the war against Britain.
Key Terms and People
mercenaries, p. 128
Battle of Trenton, p. 129 Battle of Saratoga, p. 130 Marquis de Lafayette, p. 131 Baron Friedrich von Steuben, p. 131 Bernardo de Galvez, p. 131 John Paul Jones, p. 133 George Rogers Clark, p. 133
I hmhsocialstudies.com
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the early years of the American Revolution.
The Struggle for
If YOU were there...
You are a serving maid at an inn in New York City. British soldiers often stop at the inn for a meal. You sometimes overhear their conversations, though they don't notice you. Now a Patriot leader has asked you to bring him any information you hear. You want to help the Patriot cause but wonder what will happen if you are caught spying.
Would you agree to spy for the Patriots?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Many colonists struggled for the Patriot cause. Men, women, and children all made important contributions. They fought, kept farms and shops running, and provided food and supplies. In spite of their efforts, winning the war was a great challenge. Supporting the War Effort
George Washington's chief task as the Continental Army's commander in chief was to raise troops. During the war, more than 230,000 soldiers served in the Continental Army, and another 145,000 enlisted in local militias. The typical soldier was young, often under the legal age of 16, and had little money or property. The army offered low pay, harsh conditions, and a big chance of becoming a casualty. Yet the Patriots knew they were fighting for their homes and their freedom.
Finding and keeping dedicated soldiers would be a constant challenge throughout the war. In time, the Continental Congress required states to supply soldiers. Men who could afford it often paid others, such as slaves or apprentices, to fight in their places.
One question facing General Washington was whether to recruit African Americans. Many white southerners opposed the idea, and at first Washington banned African Americans from serving. When the British promised freedom to any slave who fought on their side, however, thousands of African Americans joined the Redcoats.

26 CHAPTER 4
Battles in the Middle Colonies, 1776-77
f Ticondero
L
oston
Major Battles
Middle
Colonies
1
& New York, August 1776 Trenton, December 1776
if Princeton, January 1777 & Brandywine, September 1777
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Strengths	Strengths	J
HKwH	• Fought for a cause they	• Well-trained, well-	1
believed in	equipped soldiers	'
HMhRB • Got help from European	• Large, powerful navy fj
nations	Weaknesses	F
wMV	Weaknesses	• Had to cross Atlantic /
W w	• Untrained, poorly	Ocean	<
JS dj	equipped soldiers	• Used mercenaries as
JJk I	• Small navy	soldiers	J
	
bndywin
ChesapeS
/ / ■
I

,	? «'v :
SKILLS) interpreting maps

-Long Island New York Bay -
few York
"Philadelphia
70°W
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
"■ British advance if British victory ■■■ Colonial advance H Colonial victory
.... Proclamation Line of 1763
150 Miles
75	150 Kilometers
1.	Movement About how far was Washington's march from Boston to New York?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction How did geography affect the British advance on Philadelphia?
In response, the Continental Army began allowing free African Americans to serve.
While men served as soldiers, many women ran farms and businesses. Others helped the army by raising money for supplies or making clothing. Mercy Otis Warren, a member of a prominent family of Patriots, wrote and published several plays that supported the Revolutionary cause. Women served as messengers, nurses, and spies. A Massachusetts man noted:
At every house Women and children [are] making Cartridges, running Bullets... and at the same time animating [encouraging] their Husbands and Sons to fight.
—Anonymous, quoted in Born for Liberty, by Sara M. Evans
Perhaps the best known woman to fight in the war was Mary Ludwig Hays. She was called Molly Pitcher because she brought water to the troops. When her husband was wounded in a 1778 battle, she took his place 'loading cannons. Another woman, Deborah Sampson, dressed as a man and fought in . several battles.
Summarizing How did vari-
ous groups contribute to the war effort?
Defeats and Victories
As the Revolution gathered steam, it became more deadly. At first the Continental Army suffered a number of defeats. In time, though, the Patriots' patience began to pay off.
READING CHECK
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Today women serve in every branch of the U.S. military. In 2013 they became able to serve in combat units. Women soldiers in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars have undertaken difficult and dangerous jobs, including patrolling streets, driving trucks, and searching Iraqi and Afghan women for weapons.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 127
FOCUS OH
Reaping What is the main idea of the third paragraph under "New York"? Canada
In part because the army was short on supplies, many Patriot leaders favored fighting a defensive war. Others wanted to invade British-controlled Canada and make it the "14th colony."
Patriot troops led by General Richard Montgomery captured Montreal in November 1775. The next major target was the city of Quebec. Benedict Arnold, now a general, led his troops north on a remarkable trek through the rough backcountry of Maine. He reached Quebec around the same time that Montreal fell to Montgomery. Since his first attempt to take the city failed, Arnold waited for Montgomery's troops to join his.
Taking an immense chance, the combined armies attacked during a fierce blizzard on New Year's Eve. They were quickly defeated. The Americans had suffered a crushing loss, and the Patriots' hopes of taking Canada faded.
New York
New York City became the next battleground. General Washington had moved his troops to New York, expecting the British arrival. Sure enough, in June 1776, a fleet of British ships approached New York Bay. Led by General William Howe, the British forced the Continental Army off Long Island.
Howe's 32,000 soldiers were much better equipped than Washington's 23,000 men, most of whom were militia. The Patriot general had to use all of his skills just to save his army.
In a series of battles, Howe pounded the Continental Army, forcing it to retreat farther and farther. The Redcoats captured Patriots as well as supplies. Eventually, the British pushed Washington across the Hudson River into New Jersey. Howe's revenge for his defeat at Boston was complete.
During the New York campaigns, a young Connecticut officer named Nathan Hale went behind British lines to get secret information. Seized by the British with documents hidden in the soles of his shoes, Hale was ordered to be hanged. Before his
Crossing the Delaware
George Washington and his troops crossed the partially frozen Delaware River on the night of December 25,
1776. This daring act led to a key Patriot victory at the Battle of Trenton. German American artist Emanuel Leutze created this famous painting in 1851. A version of Leutze's Washington Crossing the Delaware hangs in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.
What feelings do you think Leutze wanted to inspire with this painting?

execution, he is said to have declared, "I regret that I have but one life to lose for my country."
New Jersey
In November 1776 the tattered
Continental Army was on the
run. Washington's remaining
6,000 men were tired and dis- ■■■■ couraged. The one-year contract for many of them would end on December 31. Who would re-enlist in this losing army, and who would replace the soldiers who left? Washington's army was in danger of vanishing.
Thinking the rebellion would end soon, Howe left New Jersey in the hands of soldiers from the German state of Hesse. The Hessians were mercenaries —foreign soldiers who fought not out of loyalty, but for pay.
On December 7 Washington retreated across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania. Even with 2,000 fresh troops, the Patriots were near the end. "These are the times that try men's souls," wrote Thomas Paine in The American Crisis, a series of pamphlets he began publishing in late 1776.
Without a convincing victory, Washington knew he would lose his army. He decided to take a big chance and go on the offensive. The Americans would attack the Hessians at Trenton, New Jersey.
128 CHAPTER 4
On Christmas night, 1776, with a winter storm lashing about them, Washington and 2,400 soldiers silently rowed across the ice-clogged Delaware River. As morning broke, the men, short on supplies and many with no shoes, marched through the snow to reach the enemy camp.
The Hessians, having celebrated the holiday the night before, were fast asleep when the Patriots sprang upon them. The Battle of Trenton was an important Patriot victory. American soldiers took more than 900 prisoners.
British general Charles Cornwallis rushed to stop Washington as he marched northeast to Princeton. On the night of January 2,1777, the Patriots left their campfires burning, then slipped into the darkness and circled behind the British troops. In the morning, Washington attacked. A local resident witnessed it:
^The battle was plainly seen from our door... and the guns went off so quick and many together that they could not be numbered ... Almost as soon as the firing was over, our house was filled and surrounded with General Washington's men/'
—Anonymous, quoted in Voices of 1776 by Richard Wheeler
As Washington watched the Redcoats flee Princeton, he cheered, "It is a fine fox chase, my boys!" Now, new soldiers joined the chase. Others re-enlisted. The army—and the Revolution—was saved.
Saratoga
The two quick defeats stung the British. In the spring of 1777, they wanted a victory.
British general John Burgoyne decided to push through New York State and cut off New England from the other colonies. The strategy required perfect timing. According
Academic
Vocabulary
strategy a plan for fighting a battle or war
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 129
to the plan, Burgoyne's army would invade from Canada, recapture Fort Ticonderoga, and sweep south to Albany. General Howe, in New York City, would sail up the Hudson River to meet him, strangling New England.
Indeed, Burgoyne took Ticonderoga in early July and headed toward Albany. Here, the timing went wrong for the British. Unknown to Burgoyne, Howe had left New York, sailed up the Chesapeake Bay, and captured Philadelphia. Delegates to the Continental Congress were forced to flee.
Meanwhile, Burgoyne's army bogged down in thick forests. The Patriots had chopped down large trees and dammed rivers to create obstacles. All along the route, the militia swarmed out of nowhere to attack the Redcoats. As Burgoyne neared Saratoga, New York, he found himself surrounded. On October 17,1777, he was forced to surrender his entire army to General Horatio Gates.
The Battle of Saratoga in New York was the turning point of the Revolutionary War. It was the greatest victory yet for the American forces. Morale soared. Patriot James Thacher wrote, "This event will make one of the most brilliant pages of American history."
Help from Europe
The French and Indian War had drastically changed the balance of power in North America. The French and Spanish had lost a large expanse of valuable land to the British. Both countries were delighted to see their powerful rival experiencing trouble in its American colonies.
The victory at Saratoga gave the Patriots something they had been desperately seeking: foreign help. Not surprisingly, it came from Britain's enemies, France and Spain. Even Britain's old ally, Holland, joined the fight on the side of the Patriots.

Two Remarkable Europeans
"The welfare of America is closely bound up with the welfare of mankind," declared a wealthy young Frenchman, the Marquis de Lafayette. Inspired by the ideas of the Revolution, Lafayette bought his own ship and arrived in America in 1777. He brought with him a group of well-trained soldiers and volunteered to serve in the Continental Army himself without pay.
Lafayette spoke little English and had never seen battle. However, he quickly became a skillful commander, earning the title of major general. Lafayette led 2,000 Patriots to successfully pursue 6,000 Redcoats throughout Virginia during 1780-81. He gave $200,000 of his own money to support the Revolution and wrote many letters home to powerful friends and family asking their aid for the Patriot cause.
In February 1778 another European came to serve heroically under Washington. Baron Friedrich von Steuben, an experienced military officer from Prussia, led with a combination of respect and fear. He started training the American troops, focusing on basic military drills. Soon he turned the Continental Army into a finely tuned fighting force. A historian called von Steuben's feat "perhaps the most remarkable achievement in rapid military training in the history of the world."
Help from France
Benjamin Franklin, a skilled and experienced diplomat, had gone to France to ask King Louis XVI for support. Finally, the Battle of Saratoga in 1777 persuaded the king that the colonists could win the war. Not until then did the king agree to an official alliance with the Patriots.
In May 1778 the Continental Congress ratified the treaty of support with France. The French had been helping the Patriots all along with some supplies and ammunition. After the treaty became official, the French increased the level of supplies and provided soldiers and ships. French naval support would be a key to defeating the British. French loans were converted into cash by New Yorker Haym Salomon. He also convinced many Hessians to leave the conflict. Help from Spain
Spain, also a bitter enemy of Britain, joined the war in 1779. Bernardo de Galvez, the governor of Spanish Louisiana, became a key ally to the Patriots. Galvez gathered a small army of Spanish soldiers, French Americans, colonists, and Native Americans. Together they made their way east from Louisiana. Galvez seized British posts all the way to Pensacola, Florida.
Summarizing How did
France and Spain help the Patriots?
READING CHECK .
Primary Source
r ............ .....................
JOURNAL ENTRY
Valley Forge
A surgeon at Valley Forge, Albigence Waldo kept a journal of what he saw during the winter of 1777—78.
//The Army which has been surprisingly healthy hitherto, now begins to grow sickly from the continued fatigues they have suffered this Campaign. Yet they still show a spirit of Alacrity [cheerful readiness] and Contentment not to be expected from so young Troops. I am Sick—discontented—and out of humour. Poor food— hard lodging—Cold Weather—fatigue—Nasty Cloaths [clothes]—nasty Cookery ... smoke and Cold—hunger and filthyness—A pox on my bad luck.//
—Albigence Waldo, from Diary of Surgeon Albigence Waldo of the Connecticut Line
ANALYSIS
SKILL! ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
Why did Waldo seem surprised by the soldiers' attitude?
Winter at Valley Forge
The entry of France and Spain into the war came at a crucial moment. The Continental Army was running very low on food and clothing. In December 1777, Washington settled his 12,000 men at Valley Forge, north of Philadelphia.
To this day, the name of Valley Forge brings to mind suffering—and courage. Yet no battles took place here. The only enemy was the brutal winter of 1777-78.
Washington's men lacked even the most basic protections against shin-deep snows. In spite of the general's repeated requests for supplies, conflicts over funding between state authorities and Congress kept supplies from coming. Washington wrote in a letter:
^To see men without clothes... without blankets to lie upon, without shoes... without a house or hut to cover them until those could be built, and submitting without a murmur, is a proof of patience and obedience which, in my opinion, can scarcely be paralleled [matched]/^
—George Washington, quoted in George Washington: A Collection
As winter roared in, soldiers quickly built crude shelters that offered little protection against the weather. Some soldiers had no shirts. Others had marched the shoes off their feet. At their guard posts, they stood on their hats to keep their feet from touching the freezing ground. One soldier wrote that getting food was the "business that usually employed us."
During that terrible winter, some 2,000 soldiers died of disease and malnutrition. Amazingly, the survivors not only stayed— they drilled and marched to the orders of Baron von Steuben, becoming better soldiers.
While the soldiers suffered through the winter at Valley Forge, the British lived a life of luxury in Philadelphia. Most of the Patriots had fled the city, leaving only Loyalists and British soldiers. Together they enjoyed the city's houses, taverns, and theaters, and held parties and balls.
Finding Main Ideas What
challenges did the Continental Army face at Valley Forge?
READING CHECK .
32 CHAPTER 4
War at Sea and in the West
While some Americans struggled against the British on land in the former colonies, others fought at sea and on the western frontier. Each area posed tough challenges.
War at Sea
The entry of the French navy into the war greatly aided the colonists. Many people had thought that the mighty British navy would crush the much smaller American fleet. However, the British failed to use their powerful navy effectively during the war.
In the fall of 1775, the Continental Congress made plans to build four American warships. Soon afterward the Congress formally established the marines and the Continental Navy. By adapting merchant vessels, the navy had eight fighting ships ready for combat by February 1776.
That month the tiny American navy launched a major offensive to damage the operating ability of the British fleet located off the Carolina coast. Rather than attack the fleet directly, the Patriots went after the British supply base on Nassau, in the Bahamas.
The American troops seized the main supply fort on the island. They then raised the newly created flag of the American Revolution over Nassau. After that campaign, the American navy focused on seizing British supply ships and weakening Britain's naval forces in the West Indies.
John Paul Jones
The Patriots owed much of their success on the seas to naval hero John Paul Jones. Jones had once been considered an outlaw. He was bom John Paul in Scotland and began working on ships at a young age. After accidentally killing the leader of a mutiny, he fled to America and added Jones to his name.
When the war broke out, Jones volunteered his services to the newly created navy. He quickly established himself as a brave and clever sailor. Considered a pirate by the
British, Jones captured many British supply ships. The French greatly admired Jones. When France entered the war in 1778, French leaders presented him with a small fleet of seven vessels to command. He named his flagship Bonhomme Richard ("Gentleman Richard") in honor of Benjamin Franklin's Poor Richard's Almanac.
One of Jones's most famous victories was the capture of the British warship Serapis on September 23, 1779. Early in the battle, the British knocked out the heaviest artillery on the Bonhomme Richard. Captain Richard Pearson of the Serapis then called out to Jones, "Has your ship struck [surrendered]?" Jones replied, "I have not yet begun to fight!" The battle continued for more than two hours. Finally the Americans wore down the British, who surrendered at 10:30 p.m.
The Continental Navy used fewer than 100 ships over the course of the war. Yet the British lost more than 200 ships to the small but effective American naval force.
War in the West
The lands west of the Appalachian Mountains were controlled by Native American nations. Both the British and the Patriots tried to enlist these groups in their cause.
George Rogers Clark volunteered to lead the western campaign. Clark had been a surveyor along the Ohio and Kentucky rivers. By the time the war broke out, he knew the lands of the Midwest well. Clark created an army from the scattered settlements in the area. One of the best-known groups was the Over Mountain Men, a band of settlers from present-day Tennessee.
Determined to weaken British support systems, Clark targeted trading villages. Following the Ohio River to the Tennessee, Clark's force set out on a 120-mile overland trek to Kaskaskia, in present-day Illinois. The village's leaders learned of the attack and surrendered. Other Patriots took Cahokia without a fight.
In February 1779 Clark launched a surprise attack on Fort Sackville near the town
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 133
1.	Movement How far did the Patriots march to get to Vincennes?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction Why did military forces follow river routes?
of Vincennes. The attack was unexpected because the nearby Wabash River was icy and flooded. Despite overflowing riverbanks, Clark's force of 150 men endured an 18-day march through freezing water. They also managed to bring enough Patriot flags for an army of hundreds. The flags were displayed near the fort, and the skilled pioneers sustained enough musket fire to indicate a much larger army. Falling for the ruse, the commander of Fort Sackville surrendered.
In general the British were more successful at winning over the Native Americans. But Clark's many campaigns undermined British support in the West.
reading Check
Finding Main Ideas How did Jones and Clark help the Patriots' war effort?
Summary and Preview The Patriots ! faced hardships as the war continued. In the next section, you will see how they finally achieved their goal of independence.
Section 3 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What groups supported the Patriot war effort? How did each group contribute?
b. Analyze Why was it difficult to find and keep soldiers in the Continental Army?
2.	a. Describe What early defeats did the Patriots face?
b.	Elaborate Was it a mistake for the British to use mercenaries to help them fight the war? Why or why not?
c.	Explain What roles did Bernardo de Galvez and the Marquis de Lafayette play in the Revolution?
3.	a. Elaborate Why do you think European nations supported the colonists rather than Great Britain? b. Evaluate Do you think that the Patriots would have won the war without help from France and Spain? Why or why not?
4.	a. Describe What difficulties did the Patriots face at Valley Forge?
b. Elaborate How might weather conditions affect the outcome of a battle?
5.	a. Identify Who was John Paul Jones?
b. Compare In what ways was Jones's naval strategy like that of the Continental Army?
c. Draw Conclusions Why was the western frontier an important area for the Patriots to control?
Critical Thinking
6. Drawing Conclusions Review the events on your time line. Copy the chart below and use it to identify the region in which the events took place and how the events reflected the Patriots'successes and failures.
Region	Patriot Problems	Patriot Successes
		
		
		
'"’'WriteSmart
7. Thinking about the Struggle for Liberty
Why was this period of the war so difficult for the Patriots? How did they struggle through? What are the one or two points that are the most important about this period of the war?
>4 CHAPTER 4
1 mdep© ncJ©n©e» I
If YOU were there...
You have grown up on a farm in South Carolina. You know every inch of the woods and marshes around your home. You are too young to join the Continental Army, but you have heard stories about a brave group of soldiers who carry out quick raids on the British, then disappear into the woods. These fighters get no pay and live in constant danger.
Would you consider joining the fighters? Why?
1. Patriot forces faced many problems in the war in the South.
2.	The American Patriots finally defeated the British at the Battle of Yorktown.
3.	The British and the Americans officially ended the war by signing the Treaty of Paris of 1783.
Building Background As the war moved to the South, American forces encountered new problems. They suffered several major defeats. But American resistance in the southern colonies was strong. Backwoods fighters confused and frustrated the British army.
The war spread to the southern colonies, where the British were finally defeated.
I l ........	. ...■ ■...:....... '
War in the South
The war across the ocean was not going the way the British government in London had planned. The northern colonies, with their ragged, scrappy fighters, proved to be tough to tame. So the British switched strategies and set their sights on the South.
The British hoped to find support from the large Loyalist populations living in Georgia, the Carolinas, and Virginia. As they moved across the South, the British also planned to free enslaved Africans and enlist them as British soldiers. Under the leadership of a new commander, General Henry Clinton, the strategy paid off—for a while.
Brutal Fighting
The southern war was particularly brutal. Much more than in the North, this phase of the war pitted Americans—Patriots versus Loyalists—against one another in direct combat. The British also destroyed crops, farm animals, and other property as they marched through the South. One British officer, Banastre Tarleton, sowed fear throughout the South by refusing to take prisoners and killing soldiers who tried to surrender.
Key Terms and People
Francis Marion, p. 136 Comte de Rochambeau, p. 137 Battle of Yorktown, p. 137 Treaty of Paris of 1783, p. 139
hmhsocialstudies.com
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the major events that led to the British defeat.
IE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 135
Georgia, the last colony to join the Revolution, was the first to fall to the British. A force of 3,500 Redcoats took Savannah in 1778 and put in place a new government.
Britain's next major target was Charleston, South Carolina. In early 1780 General Clinton landed a force of 14,000 troops around the port city. With a minimal cost of about 250 casualties, the British scored one of their biggest victories of the war. The Patriots surrendered Charleston in May, handing over four ships and some 5,400 prisoners.
Camden and King's Mountain
In August 1780, Patriot forces led by Horatio Gates tried to drive the British out of Camden, South Carolina. The attack was poorly executed, however. Gates had only half as many soldiers as he had planned for, and most were tired and hungry. In the heat of battle, many panicked and ran. The Patriot attack quickly fell apart. Of some 4,000 American troops, only about 700 escaped.
General Nathanael Greene arrived to reorganize the army. As he rode through the southern countryside, he was discouraged by the devastation. He later wrote, "I have never witnessed such scenes." American forces attacked Loyalists at King's Mountain in October 1780, scoring a major victory.
Swamp Fox
Francis Marion leads his soldiers down a river in South Carolina. From a hideout on a river island, Marion led raids against British communication and supply lines.
Which figure do you think is Francis Marion? Why?
Guerrilla Warfare
The southern Patriots
switched to swift hit-and-
run attacks known as guerrilla
warfare. No Patriot was better at this style of fighting than Francis Marion. He organized Marion's Brigade, a group of guerrilla soldiers.
Marion's Brigade used surprise attacks to disrupt British communication and supply lines. Despite their great efforts, the British could not catch Marion and his men. One frustrated general claimed, "As for this... old fox, the devil himself could not catch him." From that point on, Marion was known as the Swamp Fox.
READING CHECK
Sequencing List the events of the war in the South in chronological order.
Battle of Yorktown
In early 1781 the war was going badly for the Patriots. They were low on money to pay soldiers and buy supplies. The help of their foreign allies had not brought the war to a quick end as they had hoped. The British held most of the South, plus Philadelphia and New York City. The Patriots' morale took another blow when Benedict Arnold, one of America's most gifted officers, turned traitor.
Regrouped under Nathanael Greene, the Continental Army began harassing British general Charles Cornwallis in the Carolinas. The Patriot's system of spies kept Washington and Lafayette informed of British plans. One African American spy, a slave named James Armistead, posed as a runaway slave who wanted to help the British. He moved easily in the camps of both Cornwallis and Arnold, but sent reports of their plans back to Lafayette. Hoping to stay in communication with the British naval fleet, Cornwallis moved his force of 7,200 men to Yorktown, Virginia. It was a fatal mistake.


1'^)
r»»-
f£>
r	A
History Close-up
Battle of Yorktown
A
;W“C
J'*')*'}*-
w'
*<
S ' J-:
The British scuttled, or purposely sank, dozens of their ships. This formed a barrier that kept the French ships from coming too close.
lx
2^
<X
» f f •<>,. i
V-' <	«'	>	*
y/
‘>./V
w ■ < V '<>>_ T J
X ’TA-/;?*’
VXX'
■y 7 ?
J s- ’ *
X .v 'X ’X'
w v
American troop positions W French troop positions

y v,; -
5-	./
: J l
f l1

\)	Q
- \	A
A ‘ i

hl :
'i, ,ii: 'ii
r ff ‘ “ Wh
X
y
s
. ,W O '%< v ■ \\ X \ X '
General Washington, in New York, saw a chance to trap Cornwallis at Yorktown. He ordered Lafayette to block Cornwallis's escape by land. Then he combined his 2,500 troops with 4,000 French troops commanded by the Comte de Rochambeau (raw-shahn-BOH). Washington led the French-American force on a swift march to Virginia to cut off the other escape routes. The Patriots surrounded Cornwallis with some 16,000 soldiers. Meanwhile, a French naval fleet seized control of the Chesapeake Bay, preventing British ships from rescuing Cornwallis's stranded army.
The siege began. For weeks, the fight-
ing steadily wore down the British defenses.
In early October, Washington prepared for a major attack on the weakened British troops.
Facing near-certain defeat, on October 19, 1781, Cornwallis sent a drummer and a soldier with a white flag of surrender to Washington's camp. The Patriots took some 8,000 British prisoners—the largest British army in America.
The Battle of Yorktown was the last major battle of the American Revolution. Prime Minister Lord North received word of the Yorktown surrender in November. In shock he declared, "It is all over!"
•aK
HISTORY
VIDEO
George
Washington:
Yorktown
^1 hmhsocialstudies.com!
READING CHECK .
Drawing Conclusions Why
did the victory at Yorktown end the fighting?
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 137
Primary Source
PAMPHLET
Sentiments of an
American Woman
The Continental Army received aid from female Patriots led by Esther DeBerdt Reed and Sarah Franklin Bache, the daughter of Benjamin Franklin. In 1780 these women organized a campaign that raised $300,000 for soldiers' clothing. The following pamphlet, written by the campaign's leaders, announced the campaign. In it, the authors used images of women helping with war efforts of the past to gain support for their cause.
//On the commencement of actual war, the Women of America manifested a firm resolution to contribute ... to the deliverance of their country. Animated by the purest patriotism they are sensible of sorrow at this day, in not offering more than barren wishes for the success of so glorious a Revolution. They aspire to render themselves more really useful; and this sentiment is universal from the north to the south of the Thirteen United States. Our ambition is kindled by the fame of those heroines of antiquity, who ... have proved to the universe, that... if opinion and manners did not forbid us to march to glory by the same paths as the Men, we
should at least equal, and sometimes surpass them in our love for the public good. I glory in all that which my sex has done great and commendable. I call to mind with enthusiasm and with admiration, all those acts of courage, of constancy and patriotism, which history has transmitted to us.. JJ
//So many famous sieges where the Women have been
seen ... building new walls, digging trenches with their feeble hands, furnishing arms to their defenders, they themselves darting the missile weapons of the enemy, resigning the ornaments of their apparel, and their fortune, to fill the public treasury, and to hasten the deliverance of their country; burying themselves under its ruins; throwing themselves into the flames rather than submit to the disgrace of humiliation before a proud enemy.//
//Born for liberty, disdaining to bear the irons of a
tyrannic Government, we associate ourselves... [with
those rulers] who have extended the empire of liberty,
and contented to reign by sweetness and justice, have broken the chains of slavery, forged by tyrants.//
I,	-..............
A female spy passes news to a colonial officer.
1. commencement: start 2. manifested: presented 3. render: make 4. antiquity: ancient times 5. commendable: praiseworthy 6. disdaining: refusing 7. tyrannic: unjust 8. contented: determined
The women declare that they would fight if they were allowed.
The authors list ways in which women have helped fight wars in the past.
In this phrase, the women link themselves to great women rulers of the past.
ANALYSIS
SKILLI ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
1.	What do the writers "call to mind" in asking women to join the Patriots' cause?
2.	With whom do the writers associate themselves?

138 CHAPTER 4
The Treaty of Paris
After Yorktown, only a few small battles took place. Lacking the money to pay for a new army, Great Britain entered into peace talks with America. Benjamin Franklin had a key role in the negotiations.
Delegates took more than two years to come to a peace agreement. In the Treaty of Paris of 1783, Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States. The treaty also set America's borders. A separate treaty between Britain and Spain returned Florida to the Spanish. British leaders also accepted American rights to settle and trade west of the original thirteen colonies.
The Revolution, which had begun in 1774 with the meeting of the First Continental Congress, was finally over. At the war's end, Patriot soldiers returned to their homes and families. The courage of soldiers and civilians had made America's victory possible. As they returned home, George Washington thanked his troops for their devotion. "I . . . wish that your latter days be as prosperous as your former ones have been glorious."
Summarizing Explain how
the War for Independence finally came to an end.
READING CHECK
I
Summary and Preview Americans won I their independence from Great Britain in 1783. In the next chapter you will learn how the new nation formed its first government.
Section 4 Assessment
i hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe What problems did the Patriots experience in the war in the South?
b. Analyze What advantages did the southern Patriots have over the British in the South?
2.	a. Describe What was the Patriots' strategy for ; defeating the British at Yorktown?
i	b. Elaborate Why do you think General Cornwallis [ decided to surrender at the Battle of Yorktown? i 3. a. Identify Who helped to negotiate the Treaty of | Paris for the Americans?
• b. Predict How might relations between Great Brit-> ain and its former colonies be affected by the war?
f
I
organizer below and use it to identify and describe the most important event in turning the war in the Patriots'favor.
Event	Importance to end of war
	
i ^WriteSmart
5. Thinking About the Revolution's End After reading this section, you have a picture of the whole war. In your talk, what do you want to say about how the war ended? Were there any moments that were especially trying for the colonists? What events in your notes from class lectures might you include in a summary?
Critical Thinking
4. Evaluating Review your notes on the events that
led to the end of the war. Then copy the graphic
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 139
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
Critical
Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Constructing Time Lines
Define the Skill
Time lines are a good way to organize historical information. Time lines clearly show a sequence of historical events, eras, or people's achievements over a certain period of time. Using a time line to describe the events in the sequence in which they happened is using relative chronology. In addition to showing events in the order they happened, time lines also show the amount of time between events. Using the specific dates of events is ordering events with absolute chronology.
When you construct a time line to sequence events you can often better understand the context of certain events. It can help you determine cause and effect relationships among them or see specific themes within a time period.
The first step in actually constructing the time line is to draw a straight line using a ruler. Then mark intervals of time on the line. These represent the dates that divide the time line into smaller, equal time periods. For example, a time line of the Revolution might include three-year intervals: 1770, 1773, 1776, and so on. Then add events in the correct places on the time line. The beginning and end of the time line, each interval, and each event should be labeled with dates. As a final touch, the time line needs a title.
Once you have completed the time line, you can use it to interpret the events. Look for events that are similar, such as the meetings of the First and Second Continental Congresses. You can describe how far apart they are and which events led to each one.
Learn the Skill
Practice the Skill
When you construct a time line, you need to make some basic decisions. First, the time line needs a topic. This topic can be general or specific. For example, it might be as general as "The American Revolution," or more specific, such as "Important Battles of the Revolution." The time line should span a period that includes the main events related to the topic. A time line on all the major events of the Revolution might cover the period 1770-1783.
The next step in constructing a time line is taking notes on events from the chosen time period and topic. Write down the date when each event happened. If there are too many events, it is a good idea to include only the most important ones.
Follow these instructions to construct a time line.
1.	Using your textbook, choose a topic related to the Revolution for your time line. Decide on the dates your time line will need to cover.
2.	Use your textbook to take notes on events to include in your time line and their dates. Put the events in order.
3.	Following the steps described above, construct your time line. The finished time line should include clearly labeled dates, at least six events, and a title.
4.	Look for relationships between the events and then write a summary of the time line.
^0 CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
1.	What were American colonists who remained loyal to Great Britain called?
a.	Whigs	c. Royalists
b.	Loyalists	d. Democrats
2.	What was the name of the battle in which the Patriots finally defeated the British?
a.	Battle of Saratoga c. Battle of Yorktown
b.	Battle of New Jersey d. Battle of Valley
Forge
3.	What was the name for the colonial military force created to fight the British?
a.	mercenaries	c. Hessians
b.	Redcoats	d. Continental Army
4.	Who was the French nobleman who helped the Patriots fight the British?
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 112-116)
5.	a. Recall What actions did the First and Second Continental Congresses take?
b.	Analyze How did the events at Lexington and Concord change the conflict between Great Britain and the colonies?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think that control of Boston early in the Revolutionary War was important?
SECTION 2 (Pages 118-121)
6.	a. Identify Why is July 4, 1776, a significant date?
b. Draw Conclusions What effect did Common Sense have on colonial attitudes toward Great Britain?
a.	Bernardo de Galvez c. Baron von Steuben
b.	Marquis de Lafayette d. Lord Dunmore
c.	Predict How might the content of the Declaration of Independence lead to questions over the issue of slavery?
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 141
SECTION 3 (Pages 126-134)
7.	a. Describe What difficulties did the Patriots experience in the early years of the war?
b.	Analyze How did the Patriots turn the tide of the war? Why was the Battle of Saratoga important?
c.	Elaborate Could the Patriots have succeeded in the war without foreign help? Explain.
SECTION 4 (Pages 135-139)
8.	a. Recall Why did the British think they might find support in the southern colonies?
b.	Make Inferences Why did it take more than two years for the British and the Americans to agree to the terms of the Treaty of Paris?
c.	Evaluate In your opinion, what was the most important reason for the Patriots' defeat of the British?
Reading Skills
Main Ideas in Social Studies Use the Reading Skills taught at the beginning of the chapter to answer the
question about the reading selection below.
-----------------------------------------------
(1) Native Americans were at first encouraged by both sides to remain neutral. (2) By the summer of 1776, however, both Patriots and the British were aggressively recruiting Indian fighters. (3) Most sided with the British. (4) In northern New York, four of the six Iroquois nations fought for the British, (p. 120)
9.	Which sentence contains the main idea of the paragraph?
a.	Sentence 1
b.	Sentence 2
c.	Sentence 3
d.	Sentence 4
Reviewing Themes
10.	Politics What are three important rights listed in the Declaration of Independence?
11.	Geography What role did geography play in the fighting that took place in the West?
12.	Politics The American Revolution took place between which years?
Social Studies Skills
Constructing Time Lines Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions.
13.	Construct a time line of seven battles mentioned in the chapter. Include a complete sentence in each label that states the importance or outcome of the battle.
14.	Write a paragraph analyzing the information in the time line you've created.
myWriteSmart
15. Prepare Your Oral Report Review your notes and identify the contributions of each of the following people: Abigail Adams, John Adams, Wentworth Cheswell, Mercy Otis Warren, James Armistead, Benjamin Franklin, Bernardo de Galvez, King George III, Haym Salomon, Patrick Henry, Thomas Jefferson, the Marquis de Lafayette, Thomas Paine, and George Washington.
Choose one or two important ideas, events, or people for each period of the war. Next, choose one of your teacher's lectures to summarize and ask him or her for clarification of any words or ideas you didn't understand. Now, start to prepare your oral report by writing a one-sentence introduction to your talk. Then write a sentence or two about each period of the war. Write a concluding sentence that makes a quick connection between the Revolutionary War and our lives today. Use different types of sentences, such as declaratory, imperative, exclamatory, or interrogative, and different types of connecting words, such as conjunctions and prepositions.
Practice your talk until you can give it with only a glance or two at your notes. Be prepared to answer questions from your fellow students. As they give their reports, take notes on the information they present. Then ask them questions about any ideas or phrases you don't understand or want more information about.
Be sure to define important key terms or people in your discussion.
2 CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	What action would a Loyalist have been likely to take during the Revolution?
A attend the Continental Congress B support the Olive Branch Petition C support the Declaration of Independence D join the Continental Army
2	Which of the following events took place last?
F
The Declaration of Independence was issued. G
The Second Continental Congress met. H
The battles at Lexington and Concord occurred. J The Battle of Bunker Hill took place. 3	Why was the victory at the Battle of Saratoga so important to the Patriot cause?
A
It allowed the Declaration of Independence to be issued. B
It forced the British army to retreat from Boston. C
It convinced France to aid the colonies in their fight. D
It caused the British government to give up the war. 4	The most brutal and destructive fighting of the war probably occurred
F in the southern colonies.
G at Valley Forge.
H in New England.
J at Lexington and Concord.
5	The Declaration of Independence’s claim that people have a right to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” shows the influence of what Enlightenment thinker from Europe?
A
Jonathan Edwards B John Locke C King George III D Thomas Paine 6	In what way was Clark’s battle strategy the same as John Paul Jones’s strategy?
F
They both were badly outnumbered by the British. G
They both knew the colonial midwest region well. H
They both aimed to weaken the British by attacking their supply lines. J
They both survived the winter at Valley Forge. 7	Read the following passage from Thomas Paine’s The Crisis and use it to answer the question below.
“These are the times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country, but he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny... is not easily conquered, yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph."
—Thomas Paine, The Crisis, 1776
Document-Based Question What point is Paine trying to make in this passage?
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 143
H MULTIMEDIA CONNECTIONS
HISTORY
- i..’..................................s.
*

REVOLUTION
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 143 MC2
Assignment
Write a biographical narrative about a person who lived in the early Americas before or
during the colonial period.
A
Biographical Narrative You have been listening to and telling narratives all your life. A biographical narrative, a form of historical writing,
i is a true story about an event or brief period in a person's life.
1 Asking Questions Try using I the 5I/1/-How?questions {Who? What? When? Where? Why? How?) to help you think of descriptive details. Ask questions such as, Who was this person? What was he or she doing? Exactly where and when did the event occur? How did the person or other people react to the event?
1.	Prewrite
Getting Started
■	Think of all the people you read about in this unit. Which ones interested you most?
■	What particular events and situations in these people's lives seem most exciting or significant?
Pick one of these events or situations as the subject of your narrative.
Creating an Interesting Narrative
Make your narrative lively and interesting by including
■	Physical descriptions of people, places, and things, using details that appeal to the five senses (sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste)
■	Specific actions that relate directly to the story you are telling
■	Dialogue between the people involved or direct quotations
■	Background information about the place, customs, and setting
■	All relevant details and information needed to relate the events of the story and how they affected the person (and perhaps history)
Organize the events in your narrative in chronological order, the order in which they occurred.
2.	Write
You can use this framework to help you draft your narrative.
A
Writer's Framework Introduction
■	Grab your reader's attention with a striking detail or bit of dialogue.
■	Introduce the historical person and setting, using specific details.
■	Set the scene by telling how the event or situation began.
Body
■	Present actions and details in the order in which they occurred.
■	Connect actions with transition words like first, then, next, and finally.
■	Provide specific details to make the person and the situation come alive.
Conclusion
■	Wrap up the action of the narrative.
■	Tell how the person was affected by what happened.
■	Explain how the event or situation was important in the person’s life and how it affected history.
14 UNIT1

3. Evaluate and Revise
Evaluating
Read through your completed draft to make sure your narrative is complete, coherent, and clear. Then look for ways to improve it.
Evaluation Questions for a Biographical Narrative
; ■ Does your introduction grab the reader's attention? Do you introduce the historical person and tell how
i the event or situation began? s ■ Do you include details to make the
person, place, and event seem real? i ■ Are the actions in the story in the
order in which they occurred?
■	Have you included all of the actions and details a reader would need to understand what happened?
■	Does the conclusion tell how the event or situation affected the person and history?
Showing Sequence A clear sense of the sequence of events is important in any narrative. Here is a list of words that show those
after	next
before	now
finally	soon
first	still
(second, etc.)	then
last	when
later	while

Revising
When you revise your narrative, you may need to add transition words. Transition words help you link ideas between sentences and paragraphs. Notice the words in bold in the following sentences.
After Cabeza de Vaca and the other adventurers left the beach and started inland, they separated into different groups. Later, Cabeza de Vaca heard that many of the others had died. Still, he never lost faith that he would reach his fellow Spaniards in Mexico.
4. Proofread and Publish
Proofreading
Throughout your narrative, you used transition words to link events. Make sure that you have spelled the words correctly and have not confused them with other words. For example, be sure to use two l's in finally and not to mistake the transition word then for the comparative word than.
Publishing
One good way to share your biographical narrative is to exchange it with one or more classmates who have written about the same person you have. After reading each other's narratives, you can compare and contrast them. How are your stories similar? How do they differ?
^WriteSmart
Use myWriteSmartto create, share, and revise your paper.
• 5. Practice and Apply
Use the steps and strategies outlined in this workshop to write your biographical narrative.
OUR COLONIAL HERITAGE 145
The Big Idea Americans carried on a vigorous debate before ratifying the Constitution.
"vWriteSmart
A
Newspaper Editorial It is 1788 and you're writing an editorial for a local newspaper. You want to convince your readers that the new Constitution will be much better than the old Articles of Confederation. In this chapter you'll find the information you need to support your opinion. 48 CHAPTERS
United
States
1777
The Continental Congress approves the Articles of
Confederation on November 15.
1775
World
1778
The United States and France become allies.
1781
On March 1 the Articles of Confederation go into effect after being ratified by all 13 states.

1785
The United States begins using the dollar
currency. .
1786
Shays's Rebellion breaks out in Massachusetts.
1787
On May 14, state delegates begin to arrive at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia.
1791
The Bill Rights i: ratified the stat Decemt
1787
The Ottoman Empire declares war on Russia.
1791
The Lady Washington becomes the first U.S. ship to reach Japan.
FORMING A GOVERNMENT 1
Reading Social Studies
Economics	Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes Visualize a row of dominoes, lined up one after the other. Push over the first one, and—one after the other—all eventually fall. In this way, the events in this chapter are like dominoes that cause
each other to occur. These events, one after another, finally led to the formation of a new government and a new society. If you read closely, you will see that political disagreements started the entire process.
Understanding Chronological Order
FOCUS on Reading Like falling dominoes, historical events can create huge chains of results, often stretching over many years. To understand history and events, therefore, we often need to see how they are related in time.
Understanding Chronological Order The word chronological means "related to time." Events discussed in this history book are discussed in sequence, in the order in which they happened. To understand history better, you can use a sequence chain to take notes about events in the order they happened.
Sequence Chain
Tip: Writers sometimes signal chronological order, or sequence, by using words or phrases like these:
first, before, then, later, soon, after, before long, next, eventually, finally
Definition: There are two kinds of chronological order: absolute and relative. An absolute chronology includes the date of each event and the amount of time between each one. A relative chronology does not include dates, it simply notes the order in which events occurred.
II
