410 CHAPTER 13

World
1808 A congressional ban on importing slaves into the United States takes effect.
1831 Nat Turner's Rebellion leads to fears of further slave revolts in the South.
1835 Alexis de Tocqueville publishes Democracy in America.
1837
Victoria is crowned queen of Great Britain.
1848 Joseph R. Anderson becomes the owner of the Tredegar Iron Works, the South's only large iron factory.
1858 A treaty at Tianjin, China, gives Hong Kong to the United Kingdom.
THE SOUTH 41
1807 Parliament
bans the slave trade in
the British Empire.
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography	Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
Focus on Themes This chapter takes you into the heart of the South from 1800 through the mid-1800s. As you read, you will discover that the South depended on cotton as its economic backbone, especially after the invention of the
cotton gin. You will also read about the slave system in the South during this time and about the harsh living conditions slaves endured. As you will see, the South was home to a variety of societies and cultures.
Online Research
FOCUS on Reading Researching history topics on the Web can give you access to valuable information. However, just because the information is on the Web doesn't mean it is automatically valuable.
Evaluating Web Sites Before you use information you find online, you need to evaluate the site it comes from. The checklist below can help you determine if the site is worth your time.
Evaluating Web Sites Site:	URL:	Date of access:		
Rate each item on this 1-3 scale. Then add up the total score.			
1. Authority	No	Some	Yes
a. Authors are clearly identified by name.	1	2	3
b. Contact information is provided for authors.	1	2	3
c. Authors' qualifications are clearly stated.	1	2	3
d. Site has been updated recently.	1	2	3
II.
Content a. Site's information is useful to your project.	1	2	3
b. Information is clear and well-organized.	1	2	3
c. Information appears to be at the right level.	1	2	3
d. Links to additional important information are provided.	1	2	3
e. Information can be verified in other sources.	1	2	3
f. Graphics are helpful, not just decorative.	1	2	3
III.
Design and Technical Elements a. Pages are readable and easy to navigate.	1	2	3
b. Links to other sites work.	1	2	3
Total Score			
36-28 = very good site	27-20 = average site	below 20 =		poor site
412 CHAPTER 13
You Try It!
The passage below is from the chapter you are about to read.
Z"
r* f.
Cotton Becomes Profitable
Cotton had been grown in the New World for centuries, but it had not been a very profitable crop. Before cotton could be spun into thread for weaving into cloth, the seeds had to be removed from the cotton fibers.
Long-staple cotton, also called black-seed cotton, was fairly easy to process. Workers could pick the seeds from the cotton with relative ease. But long-staple cotton grew well in only a few places in the South. More common was short-staple cotton, which was also known as green-seed cotton. Removing the seeds from this cotton was difficult and time consuming. A worker could spend an entire day picking the seeds from a single pound of short-staple cotton.
From
Chapter 13, pp. 414-415
KeyTerais
Chapter 13
Section 1
cotton gin (p. 415) planters (p. 416) cotton belt (p. 416) factors (p. 417)
Tredegar Iron Works (p. 419)
Section 2
yeomen (p. 422)
Section 3
folktales (p. 427)
spirituals (p. 427)
Nat Turner's Rebellion (p. 428)
Nat Turner (p. 428)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
primary (p. 418)
aspect (p. 426)
After you read the passage, complete the following activity.
Suppose that after reading this passage you decide to do some research on cotton growing. You use a search engine that directs you to a site. At that site, you find the information described below. Using the evaluation criteria listed on the previous page, decide if this is a site you would recommend to others.
a. The authors of the site are listed as "Bob and Mack, good friends who enjoy working together."
c.
The site was last updated on "the last time we got together." The title of the site is "Cotton Pickin'." There are few headings.
d.	This ten-page site includes nine pages about the authors' childhood on a cotton farm. No illustrations are included.
e.	Pages are very long, but they load quickly, as there are no graphics. There is one link to a site selling cotton clothing.
As you read Chapter 13, think about what topics would be interesting to research on the Web. If you do some research on the Web, remember to use the evaluation list to analyze the Web site.
THE SOUTH 41

SECTION

TEKS 7C, 10A, 10B,11A, 12A,12B, 27A,27D, 28A
What You Will Learn.
1.	The invention of the cotton gin revived the economy of the South.
2.	The cotton gin created a cotton boom in which farmers grew little else.
3.	Some people encouraged southerners to focus on other crops and industries.
T
The Big Idea
The invention of the cotton gin made the South a one-crop economy and increased the need for slave labor.
Key Terms and People
cotton gin, p. 475 planters, p. 416 cotton belt, p. 416 factors, p. 417 Tredegar Iron Works, p. 419
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the causes of the cotton boom in the South.
Growth of the Cotton Industry
If YOU were there...
You are a field-worker on a cotton farm in the South in about 1800. Your job is to separate the seeds from the cotton fibers. It is dull, tiring work because the tiny seeds are tangled in the fibers. Sometimes it takes you a whole day just to clean one pound of cotton! Now you hear that someone has invented a machine that can clean cotton 50 times faster than by hand.
How might this machine change your life?

BUILDING BACKGROUND
Sectional differences had always existed between different regions of the United States. The revolutionary changes in industry and transportation deepened the differences between North and South. The South remained mainly agricultural. New technology helped the region become the Cotton Kingdom. Reviving the South's Economy
Before the American Revolution, three crops dominated southern agriculture—tobacco, rice, and indigo. These crops, produced mostly by enslaved African Americans, played a central role in the southern economy and culture.
After the American Revolution, however, prices for tobacco, rice, and indigo dropped. When crop prices fell, the demand for and the price of slaves also went down. In an effort to protect their incomes, many farmers tried, with little success, to grow other crops that needed less labor. Soon, however, cotton would transform the southern economy and greatly increase the demand for slave labor.
Cotton Becomes Profitable
Cotton had been grown in the New World for centuries, but it had not been a very profitable crop. Before cotton could be spun into thread for weaving into cloth, the seeds had to be removed from the cotton fibers.
414 CHAPTER 13
Cotton Gin
CONNECT TO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Eli Whitney's cotton gin enabled workers to easily remove seeds from cotton fibers. The result was a dramatic increase in cotton production in the South.
How did the cotton gin remove seeds from cotton fibers?
o The operator turned the crank.
Q
The crank turned a roller with teeth that stripped the seeds away from the cotton fiber. Q
Brushes on a second roller lifted the seedless cotton off the teeth of the first cylinder and dropped it out of the machine. © A belt connected the rollers so that they would both turn when the crank was turned.
Long-staple cotton, also called black-seed cotton, was fairly easy to process. Workers could pick the seeds from the cotton with relative ease. But long-staple cotton grew well in only a few places in the South. More common was short-staple cotton, which was also known as green-seed cotton. Removing the seeds from this cotton was difficult and time consuming. A worker could spend an entire day picking the seeds from a single pound of short-staple cotton.
By the early 1790s the demand for American cotton began increasing rapidly. For instance, in Great Britain, new textile factories needed raw cotton that could be used for
making cloth, and American cotton producers could not keep up with the high demand for their cotton. These producers of cotton needed a machine that could remove the seeds from the cotton more rapidly.
Eli Whitney's Cotton Gin
Northerner Eli Whitney finally patented such a machine in 1793. The year before, Whitney had visited a Georgia plantation owned by Catherine Greene where workers were using a machine that removed seeds from long-staple cotton. This machine did not work well on short-staple cotton, and Greene asked Whitney if he could improve it. By the next spring, Whitney had perfected his design for the cotton gin, a machine that removes seeds from short-staple cotton. ("Gin" is short for engine.) The cotton gin used a hand-cranked cylinder with wire teeth to pull cotton fibers from the seeds.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
The same patent law that protected Whitney's invention of the cotton gin protects the rights of inventors today.
Whitney hoped to keep the design of the gin a secret, but the machine was so useful that his patent was often ignored by other manufacturers. Whitney described how his invention would improve the cotton business.
THE SOUTH 4
'^One man will clean ten times as much cotton as he can in any other way before known and also clean it much better than in the usual mode [method]. This machine may be turned by water or with a horse, with the greatest ease, and one man and a horse will do more than fifty men with the old machines/^
—Eli Whitney, quoted in Eli Whitney and the Birth of American Technology by Constance McLaughlin Green
Whitney's gin revolutionized the cotton industry. Planters—large-scale farmers who held more than 20 slaves—built cotton gins that could process tons of cotton much faster than hand processing. A healthy crop almost guaranteed financial success because of high demand from the textile industry.
Reading Check
Drawing Conclusions
What effects did the cotton gin have on the southern economy?
The Cotton Boom
Whitney's invention of the cotton gin made cotton so profitable that southern fanners abandoned other crops in favor of growing cotton. The removal of Native Americans opened up more land, while the development of new types of cotton plants helped spread cotton production throughout the South as far west as Texas. This area of high cotton production became known as the cotton belt.
Production increased rapidly—from about 2 million pounds in 1791 to roughly a billion pounds by 1860. As early as 1840, the United States was producing more than half of the cotton grown in the entire world. The economic boom attracted new settlers, built up wealth among wealthy white southerners, and firmly put in place the institution of slavery in the South.
Cotton Belt
Cotton had many advantages as a cash crop. It cost little to market. Unlike food staples, harvested cotton could be stored for a long time. Because cotton was lighter than other staple crops, it also cost less to transport long distances.
Farmers eager to profit from growing cotton headed west to find land. Farmers also began to apply scientific methods to improve crop production. Cotton had one disadvantage as a crop—it rapidly used up the nutrients in the soil. After a few years, cotton could make the land useless for growing anything. Some agricultural scientists recommended crop rotation—changing the crop grown on a particular plot of land every few years. Different crops needed different nutrients, so crop rotation would keep the land fertile longer. Other agricultural scientists began to study soil chemistry, in an effort to keep the land rich and productive.
As the cotton belt grew, farmers continued trying to improve the crop. Agricultural scientists worked at crossbreeding short-staple cotton with other varieties. As a result, new, stronger types of cotton were soon growing throughout the cotton belt. This led to expansion of the cotton industry through the 1860s.
The cotton boom involved much more than growing and harvesting cotton. Harvested cotton had to be ginned, pressed into bales, and then shipped to market or to warehouses. Special agents helped do everything from marketing cotton to customers to insuring crops against loss or damage. Factories were built to produce items needed by cotton farmers, such as ropes to bale cotton.
Growing and harvesting cotton required many field hands. Rather than pay wages to free workers, planters began to use more slave labor. Congress had made bringing slaves into the United States illegal in 1808. However, the growing demand for slaves led to an increase in the slave trade within the United States.
Cotton Trade
In an 1858 speech before the U.S. Senate, South Carolina politician James Henry Hammond declared, "Cotton is King!" Without cotton, Hammond claimed, the global economy would fail. He believed that southern cotton was one of the most valuable resources in the world. Southern cotton was used to make cloth in England and the North. Many southerners shared Hammond's viewpoints about cotton. Southerner David Christy declared, "King cotton is a profound [leamed] statesman, and knows what measures will best sustain [protect] his throne."
The cotton boom made the South a major player in world trade. Great Britain became the South's most valued foreign trading partner. Southerners also sold tons of cotton to the growing textile industry in the northeastern United States. This increased trade led to the growth of major port cities in the South, including Charleston, South Carolina; Savannah, Georgia; and New , Orleans, Louisiana.
In these cities, crop brokers called factors managed the cotton trade. Farmers sold their cotton to merchants, who then made deals with the factors. Merchants and factors also arranged loans for farmers who needed to buy supplies. They often advised farmers on how to invest profits. Once farmers got their cotton to the port cities, factors arranged for transportation aboard trading ships.
However, shipping cotton by land to port cities was very difficult in the South. The few major road projects at the time were limited to the Southeast. Most southern farmers had to ship their goods on the region's rivers. On the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, flatboats and steamboats carried cotton and other products to port. Eventually, hundreds of steamboats traveled up and down the mighty Mississippi River each day.
Identifying Cause and Effect
What effect did the cotton boom have on the slave trade within the United States?
Reading Check ,
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Almost half of the nation's largest ports are located in the South. Combined, they ship more than a billion tons of cargo each year.
THE SOUTH 41
i The South's Cotton Economy
Eli Whitney's cotton gin began the cotton boom. Soon, the Cotton Kingdom stretched across the South. For the cotton planters to succeed, they had to get their cotton to market.

Enslaved African Americans did most of the planting, harvesting, and processing of cotton.
Other Crops and Industries
Some leaders worried that the South was depending too much on cotton. They wanted southerners to try a variety of cash crops and investments. These leaders wanted the South to become more self-sufficient, instead of relying on the North and foreign countries for basic items. In addition to a more successful economy, this kind of variety would make the South less susceptible to tariff policies.
Academic
Vocabulary
primary
main, most important
Food and Cash Crops
One such crop was corn, the primary southern food crop. By the late 1830s the top three corn-growing states in the nation were all in the South. The South's other successful food crops included rice, wheat, and sugarcane.
Production of tobacco, the South's first major cash crop, was very time consuming because tobacco leaves had to be cured, or dried, before they could be shipped to market. In 1839 a slave discovered a way to improve the drying process. The faster curing process increased tobacco production.
Partly as a result of the cotton boom, hemp and flax also became major cash crops. Their fibers were used to make rope and sackcloth used to bundle cotton into bales.
Industry
Many of the first factories in the South were built to serve farmers' needs by processing crops such as sugarcane. In 1803 the nation's first steam-powered sawmill was built in Donaldsonville, Louisiana. This new technology enabled lumber companies to cut, sort, and clean wood quickly.
By the 1840s, entrepreneurs in Georgia began investing in cotton mills. In 1840, there were 14 cotton mills; by the mid-1850s, there were more than 50. A few mill owners followed the model established by Francis Cabot Lowell. However, most built small-scale factories on the falls of a river for waterpower. A few steam-powered mills were built in towns without enough waterpower.
Southerners such as Hinton Rowan Helper encouraged industrial growth in the South.
^We should... keep pace with the progress of the age. We must expand our energies, and acquire habits of enterprise and industry; we should rouse ourselves from the couch of lassitude [laziness] and inure [set] our minds to thought and our bodies to action/'
— Hinton Rowan Helper, The Impending Crisis of the South: How to Meet It
418 CHAPTER 13
Textile mills in Great Britain were the largest foreign buyers of southern cotton.
Joseph R. Anderson followed Helper's advice. In 1848 Anderson became the owner of the Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, Virginia—one of the most productive iron works in the nation. It was the only factory to produce bridge materials, cannons, steam engines, and other products.
Industry, however, remained a small part of the southern economy. Southern industry faced stiff competition from the North and from England, both of which could produce many goods more cheaply. And as long as agricultural profits remained high, southern investors preferred to invest in land.
reading Check
FOCUS ON
Reaping What kind of Web site would you look for to learn more about the Tredegar Iron Works?
Making Inferences Why
were there fewer industries in the South?
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
Drawing conclusions Why do you think cotton was so important to the South's economy?
I
Summary and Preview you have read I about how southern farmers worked to improve farming methods. In the next section you will read about the structure of southern society.
Section 1 Assessment
! hmhsocialstudies.com
ONUNE QUIZ
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe How did the cotton gin make processing cotton easier?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why had slavery been on the decline before the invention of the cotton gin? How did slavery change as a result of the cotton gin?
c.	Predict How might the invention of the cotton ■ gin and the rise of cotton production and slavery
affect Southern society?
2.	a. Identify What areas of the United States made up the cotton belt? What physical characteristics helped define the area?
| b. Evaluate Do you think the South should have I paid more attention to its industrial growth? Why?
I 3. a. Describe What other crops and industries were
encouraged in the South?
b. Make Inferences Why were some southern
leaders worried about the South's reliance on cotton?
Critical Thinking
4. Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes on the causes of the cotton boom. Then add to your graphic organizer by identifying the effects of the cotton boom on the South.
"^WriteSmart
5. Noting Life on the Cotton Farm In your notebook, note how Whitney's gin changed life on the farm. Also note other details about cotton farming you could include in your sketch.
THE SOUTH 4‘
TEKS 7B,7C,10B
Sleuth ©m Society
What You Will Learn.
1.	Southern society and culture consisted of four main groups.
2.	Free African Americans in the South faced a great deal of discrimination.
T
If YOU were there...
Your family owns a small farm in Georgia in the 1840s. Sometimes you work in the fields, but more often you tend the vegetable garden and peach orchard. Since you have no close neighbors, you look forward to Sundays. Going to church gives you a chance to socialize with other young people. Sometimes you wonder what it would be like to live in a city like Savannah.
How would life be different if you left the farm for the city?
The Big Idea
Southern society centered around agriculture.
Key Term
yeomen, p. 422
hmhsocialstudies.com
w TAKING NOTES
BUILDING BACKGROUND
Although the South had some industry, agriculture was the heart of the southern economy. Cotton was king. As a result, wealthy plantation families were the most prominent social class in southern society. Small farmers, however, made up the largest part of the population. Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the different segments of southern society.
Southern Society and Culture
Popular fiction often made it seem that all white southerners had many slaves and lived on large plantations. Many fiction writers wrote about wealthy southern families who had frequent, grand parties. The ideal image of the Antebellum (before the war) South included hospitality and well-treated slaves on beautiful plantations that almost ran themselves.
This romantic view was far from the reality. During the first half of the 1800s, only about one-third of white southern families had slaves. Fewer families had plantations. Despite their small numbers, these planters had a powerful influence over the South. The economy of the South was dependent on agriculture, and most of the agricultural production relied on slave plantations. Many plantation owners served as political leaders. They led a society made up of many different kinds of people, including yeomen farmers, poor whites, slaves, and free African Americans. Each of these segments of society contributed to the economic success of the South.
420 CHAPTER 13
Planters
As the wealthiest members of southern society, planters also greatly influenced the economy. Some showed off their wealth by living in beautiful mansions. Many others chose to live more simply. A visitor described wealthy planter Alexander Stephens's estate as "an old wooden house" surrounded by weeds. Some planters saved all of their money to buy more land and slaves.
Male planters were primarily concerned with raising crops and supervising slave laborers. They left the running of the plantation household to their wives. The planter's wife oversaw the raising of the children and supervised the work of all slaves within the household. Slave women typically cooked, cleaned, and helped care for the planter's children. Wives also took on the important
History Close-up
A
Southern Plantation A typical plantation had fields as well as many buildings where different work was done.
This picture shows some of the more important buildings that were a part of the plantation system.
social duties of the family. For example, many southern leaders discussed political issues at the dances and dinners hosted by their wives.
Planters often arranged their children's marriages based on business interests. Lucy Breckinridge, the daughter of a wealthy Virginia planter, was married by arrangement in 1865. Three years earlier, she had described in her journal how she dreaded the very thought of marriage. "A woman's life after she is married, unless there is an immense amount of love, is nothing but suffering and hard work." How Breckinridge's life in her own arranged marriage would have turned out cannot be known. She died of typhoid fever just months after her wedding.
African American in this picture be different from that of staves in the South?

Yeomen and Poor Whites
Most white southerners were yeomen, owners of small farms. Yeomen owned few slaves or none at all. The typical farm averaged 100 acres. Yeomen took great pride in their work. In 1849 a young Georgia man wrote, "I desire above all things to be a 'Farmer.' It is the most honest, upright, and sure way of securing all the comforts of life."
Yeoman families, including women and children, typically worked long days at a variety of tasks. Some yeomen held a few slaves but worked alongside them.
The poorest of white southerners lived on land that could not grow cash crops. They survived by hunting, fishing, raising small gardens, and doing odd jobs for money.
Religion and Society
Most white southerners shared similar religious beliefs. Because of the long distances between farms, families often saw their neighbors only at church events, such as revivals or socials. Rural women often played volunteer roles in their churches. Wealthy white southerners thought that their religion justified their position in society and the institution of
slavery. They argued that God created some people, like themselves, to rule others. This belief opposed many northern Christians' belief that God was against slavery.
Urban Life
Many of the largest and most important cities in the South were strung along the Atlantic coast and had begun as shipping centers. Although fewer in number, the southern cities were similar to northern cities. City governments built public water systems and provided well-maintained streets. Public education was available in a few places. Wealthy residents occasionally gave large sums of money to charities, such as orphanages and public libraries. Southern urban leaders wanted their cities to appear as modern as possible.
As on plantations, slaves did much of the work in southern cities. Slaves worked as domestic servants, in mills, in shipyards, and at skilled jobs. Many business leaders held slaves or hired them from nearby plantations.
Reading Check
Summarizing What different groups made up southern society?
422 CHAPTER 13
Free African Americans and Discrimination
Although the vast majority of African Americans in the South were enslaved, more than 250,000 free African Americans lived in the region by 1860. Some were descendants of slaves who were freed after the American Revolution. Others were descendants of refugees from Toussaint L'Ouverture's Haitian Revolution in the late 1790s. Still others were former slaves who had run away, been freed by their slaveholder, or earned enough money to buy their freedom.
Free African Americans lived in both rural and urban areas. Most lived in the countryside and worked as paid laborers on plantations or farms. Free African Americans in cities often worked a variety of jobs, mostly as skilled artisans. Some, like barber William Johnson of Natchez, Mississippi, became quite successful in their businesses. Frequently, free African Americans, especially those in the cities, formed social and economic ties with one another. Churches often served as the center of their social lives.
Free African Americans faced constant discrimination from white southerners. Many
governments passed laws limiting the rights of free African Americans. Most free African Americans could not vote, travel freely, or hold certain jobs. In some places, free African Americans had to have a white person represent them in any business transaction. In others, laws restricted where they were allowed to live or conduct business.
Many white southerners argued that free
African Americans did not have the ability to take care of themselves, and they used this belief to justify the institution of slavery. "The status of slavery is the only one for which the African is adapted," wrote one white Mississippian. To many white southerners, the very existence of free African Americans threatened the institution of slavery.
Finding Main ideas What
challenges did free African Americans face in the South?
I
Summary and Preview Southern soci-I ety was led by rich planters but included groups of small farmers, slaves, and free African Americans as well. These groups each had their own culture. In the next sec- tion you will read about life under slavery.
Reading Check .
Section 2 Assessment
^lrnJlsocjalstu(jjGS com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What was the largest social group in the South? How did its members make a living?
b.	Compare In what ways were southern cities similar to northern cities?
c.	Elaborate How did cotton and the practice of slavery support Southern society?
2.	a. Describe What jobs were available to free African Americans in the South? Why were these jobs the only ones available?
b.	Analyze Why did many white southerners fear free African Americans?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think that discrimination against free African Americans was harsher in the South than in the North?
d.	Compare How were the effects of social, political, and economic factors different for slaves and free blacks?
Critical Thinking
3. Comparing and Contrasting Review your notes on the different kinds of people who lived in the South. Then use a graphic organizer like the one below to identify the similarities and differences of the lives of planters, yeomen, and free African
4. Describing the Life of Cotton Farmers In your notebook, describe the different roles played by male planters and their wives. What challenges would female planters have faced? When would the planters have had a chance to socialize?
THE SOUTH 4;
The Slave System
S| TEKS 7B,7C,10B,23A,23C,23D, 3 26A, 26B
What You Will Learn...
1.	Slaves worked at a variety of jobs on plantations.
2.	Life under slavery was difficult and dehumanizing.
3.	Slave culture centered around family, community, and religion. <
4.	Slave uprisings led to stricter slave codes in many states.
i...................... .. ......J
T
The slave system in the South produced harsh living conditions and occasional rebellions.
..........................7
Key Terms and People
folktales, p. 427 spirituals, p. 427 Nat Turner's Rebellion, p. 428 Nat Turner, p. 428
If YOU were there...
You are a reporter for a newspaper in Philadelphia in the 1850s. You are writing a series of articles about the slave system in the South.
To get background for your stories, you are planning to interview some former slaves who now live in Philadelphia. Some have bought their freedom, while others have successfully escaped from slavery.
What questions will you ask in your interviews?
B BUILDING BACKGROUND
While most white southern families were I not slaveholders, the southern economy depended on the work of 1 slaves. This was true not only on large plantations but also on smaller farms and in the cities. Few chances existed for enslaved African Americans to escape their hard lives.

Working in the Planter's Home
Some slaves worked as butlers, cooks, or nurses in the planter's home. These slaves often had better food, clothing, and shelter than field hands did, but they often worked longer hours. They had to serve the planter's family 24 hours a day.
Working at Skilled Jobs
On larger plantations, some enslaved African Americans worked at skilled jobs, such as blacksmithing or carpentry. Sometimes planters let these slaves sell their services to other people. Often planters collected a portion of what was earned but allowed slaves to keep the rest. In this way, some skilled slaves earned enough money to buy their freedom from their slaveholders. For example, William Ellison earned his freedom in South Carolina by working for wages as a cotton gin maker. For years, he worked late at night and on Sundays. He bought his freedom with the money he earned. Eventually, he was also able to buy the freedom of his wife and daughter.
Slaves and Work
Most enslaved African Americans lived in rural areas where they worked on farms and plantations. Enslaved people on small farms usually did a variety of jobs. On large plantations, most slaves were assigned to specific jobs, and most worked in the fields. Most slaveholders demanded that slaves work as much as possible. Supervisors known as drivers, who were sometimes slaves themselves, made sure that slaves followed orders and carried out punishments.
Working in the Field
Most plantation owners used the gang-labor system. In this system, all field hands worked on the same task at the same time. They usually worked from sunup to sundown. Former slave Harry McMillan had worked on a plantation in South Carolina. He recalled that the field hands usually did not even get a break to eat lunch. "You had to get your victuals [food] standing at your hoe," he remembered.
Men, women, and even children older than about 10 usually did the same tasks. Sickness and poor weather rarely stopped the work. "The times I hated most was picking cotton when the frost was on the bolls [seed pods]," recalled former Louisiana slave Mary Reynolds. "My hands git sore and crack open and bleed."
READING CHECK
Summarizing What were some types of work done by enslaved people on plantations?
hmhsocialstudies.com

Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the slave system.
Life Under Slavery
Generally, slaveholders viewed slaves as property, not as people. Slaveholders bought and sold slaves to make a profit. The most common method of sale was at an auction. The auction itself determined whether families would be kept together or separated. Sometimes a buyer wanted a slave to fill a specific job, such as heavy laborer, carpenter, or blacksmith. The buyer might be willing to pay for the slave who could do the work, but not for that slave's family. Families would then be separated with little hope of ever getting back together.
Slave traders sometimes even kidnapped free African Americans and then sold them into slavery. For example, Solomon Northup,
a free African American, was kidnapped in Washington, D.C. He spent 12 years as a slave until he finally proved his identity and gained his release.
Living Conditions
Enslaved people often endured poor living conditions. Planters housed them in dirt-floor cabins with few furnishings and often leaky roofs. The clothing given to them was usually simple and made of cheap, coarse fabric. Some slaves tried to brighten up their
424 CHAPTER 13
THE SOUTH
Academic Vocabulary aspect part
clothing by sewing on designs from discarded scraps of material. In this way, they expressed their individuality and personalized the clothing assigned to them by the planters.
Likewise, many slaves did what they could to improve their small food rations. Some planters allowed slaves to keep their own gardens for vegetables, and chickens for eggs.
Other slaves were able to add a little variety to their diet by fishing or picking wild berries.
Punishment and Slave Codes
Some planters offered more food or better living conditions to encourage slaves' obedience. However, most slaveholders used punishment instead.
Some would punish one slave in front of others as a warning to them all.
Harry McMillan recalled some of the punishments he had witnessed.
^The punishments were whipping, putting you in the stocks [wooden frames to
lock people in] and making you wear irons and a chain at work. Then they had a collar to put round your neck with two horns, like cows' horns, so that you could not lie down... Sometimes they dug a hole like a well with a door on top.
This they called a dungeon keeping you in it two or three weeks or a month, or sometimes till you died inthere/^
—Harry McMillan, quoted in Major Problems in the History of the American South, Volume I, edited by Paul D. Escott and David R. Goldfield
To further control slaves' actions, many states passed strict laws called slave codes. Some laws prohibited slaves from traveling far from their homes. Literacy laws in most southern states prohibited the education of slaves. Alabama, Virginia, and Georgia had laws that allowed the fining and whipping of anyone caught teaching enslaved people to read and write.
Summarizing How did slave-
holders control slaves?
Reading Check .
Slave Culture
Many enslaved Africans found comfort in their community and culture. They made time for social activity, even after exhausting workdays, in order to relieve the hardship of their lives. Although they were forced to immigrate to the United States, their culture is one of the foundations of the current national identity, especially in the worlds of music and religion.
Family and Community
Family was the most important aspect of slave communities, and many slaves feared separationmorethantheyfearedpunishment. Josiah Henson never forgot the day that he and his family were auctioned. His mother begged the slaveholder who bought her to buy Josiah, too. The slaveholder refused, and Henson's entire family was separated.
426 CHAPTER 13
is- &
W<
•<
«3NRMr.jRF ^wlr
k’-^S Ife >♦« F ,W
•■'!W
The lives of slaves revolved around the work that was required of them. For many, this meant doing the backbreaking work of X	harvesting and loading tons of cotton. Most slaves found hope
and a chnrt Acrarw frniYt thpir dailv mkprv in Sundav church


p >; 5 and a short escape from their daily misery in Sunday church "	services. Others sought to escape permanently and ran away,
hoping to reach the freedom of the North. A failed escape attempt, however, could result in a cruel whipping—or worse.
r | .1 What different aspects of slavery are shown in these pictures?
Enslaved parents kept their heritage alive by passing down family histories as well as African customs and traditions. They also told folktales, or stories with a moral, to teach lessons about how to survive under slavery. Folktales often included a clever animal character called a trickster. The trickster—which often represented slaves—defeated a stronger animal by outwitting it. Folktales reassured slaves that they could survive by outsmarting more powerful slaveholders.
Religion
Religion also played an important part in slave culture. By the early 1800s many slaves were Christians. They came to see themselves, like the slaves in the Old Testament, as God's chosen people, much like the Hebrew slaves in ancient Egypt who had faith that they would someday live in freedom.
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Some slaves sang spirituals, emotional Christian songs that blended African and European music, to express their religious beliefs. For example, "The Heavenly Road" reflected slaves' belief in their equality in the eyes of God.
The musical influence of these inspirational slave songs can be heard today in gospel music.
^Come, my brother, if you never did pray, I hope you pray tonight;
For I really believe I am a child of God As I walk on the heavenly road/^
—Anonymous, quoted in Afro-American Religious History, edited by Milton C. Sernett
Slaves blended some aspects of their traditional African religions with those of the Christianity that the slaveholders followed. They worshipped in secret, out of sight of slaveholders. Some historians have called slave religion the invisible institution.
THE SOUTH 4
August 23,1831
Most of the rebelling slaves are captured or killed at James Parker's plantation. Turner escapes.
Slave Nat Turner led a revolt against white slaveholders in 1831 .This is a map of his route and a depiction of his capture.
ANALYSIS
SKILL
Analyzing Visuals 1.	Location Where did Nat Turner's Rebellion take place?
2.	Movement How many days did it take to capture Nat Turner?
Seeds of Rebellion
Maintaining their own religious beliefs and practices was only one way in which enslaved people resisted slaveholders' attempts to control them completely. In small ways, slaves rebelled against the system daily. Sometimes they worked slower to protest long hours in the fields. Other times they ran away for a few days to avoid an angry slaveholder. Some slaves tried to escape permanently, but most left only for short periods, often to go and visit relatives.
Gaining freedom by escaping to the North was hard. If discovered, slaves were captured and sent back to their slaveholders, where they faced certain punishment or death. However, thousands of enslaved people succeeded in escaping.
Summarizing How did
slaves' religious beliefs affect their attitudes toward slavery?
READING CHECK .
Slave Uprisings
Although violent slave revolts were relatively rare, white southerners lived in fear of them. Two planned rebellions were stopped before they began. Gabriel Prosser planned a rebellion near Richmond, Virginia, in 1800. Denmark Vesey planned one in Charleston, South Carolina, in 1822. Local authorities executed most of those involved in planning these rebellions. Though Vesey was executed as the leader of the Charleston conspiracy, several accounts written after his death by anti-slavery writers claimed he was a hero.
The most violent slave revolt in the country occurred in 1831 and is known as Nat Turner's Rebellion. Nat Turner, a slave from Southampton County, Virginia, believed that God had told him to end slavery. On an August night in 1831, Turner led a group of slaves in a plan to kill all of the slaveholders and their families in the county. First, they
428 CHAPTER 13
attacked the family that held Turner as a slave. Soon they had killed about 60 white people in the community.
More than 100 innocent slaves who were not part of Turner's group were killed in an attempt to stop the rebellion. Turner himself led authorities on a chase around the countryside for six weeks. He hid in caves and in the woods before he was caught and brought to trial. Before his trial, Turner made a confession. He expressed his belief that the revolt was justified and worth his death: "I am willing to suffer the fate that awaits me." Turner was executed on November 11, 1831. After the rebellion, many states strengthened their slave codes. The new codes placed stricter control on enslaved people. Despite resistance, slavery continued to spread.
Reading Check
Finding Main Ideas
What was Nat Turner's Rebellion, and what happened as a result?
I
Summary and Preview several groups I of African Americans attempted to end slavery by rebellion. All of the attempts failed. In the next chapter you will read about efforts to reform American society.
Primary Source
LETTER
Nat Turner's Rebellion
In 1831 a white southerner who had escaped the rebellion wrote a letter describing the mood of the area where Nat Turner had killed slaveholders.
//The oldest inhabitants of our county have never experienced such a distressing [terrible] time, as we have had since Sunday night last. The [slaves], about fifteen miles from this place, have massacred from 50 to 75 women and children, and some 8 or 10 men. Every house, room and corner in this place is full of women and children, driven from home, who had to take to the woods, until they could get to this place. We are worn out with fatigue [tiredness]//
—Richmond Enquirer, quoted in The Southampton Slave Revolt of 1831 by Henry I.Tragle
The author believes no one in the county has been through a worse event.
The author says that many people went into hiding when the rebellion began.
ANALYSIS
SKILLS ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
What emotions do you think the author of this letter was feeling?
Section 3 Assessment
y hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What different types of work were done by slaves on plantations?
b. Elaborate Do you think that skilled slaves had advantages over other slaves? Why or why not?
2.	a. Describe What were living conditions like for most slaves?
b. Summarize In what different ways did slaveholders encourage obedience from their slaves?
3.	a. Recall What was the purpose of African American folktales and spirituals?
b. Explain How did slaves try to maintain a sense of community?
4.	a. Describe What was the outcome of Nat Turner's Rebellion?
b. Elaborate What do you think were some reasons why slaves rebelled?
Critical Thinking
5. Evaluating Review your notes on the slavery system. Then use a graphic organizer like the one shown below to identify the two most important reasons enslaved people challenged the system as well as how they did so.
Reasons for Challenging Slavery	| Ways of k | Challenging Slavery
	1
"’J'WriteSmart
6. Describing the Life of Slaves Add notes about the life of slaves to your notebook. What would it have been like to be a slave? How would it have felt to have been separated from your family?
THE SOUTH 4
Social Studies Skills
Analysis	Critical Thinking	Civic
Participation
Interpreting and Creating Charts and Graphs
Define the Skill
Graphs and charts are drawings that classify and display mathematical data in a clear, visual format. There are three basic types of graphs. Line graphs and bargraphs plot changes in quantities over time. Bar graphs are also used to compare quantities within a category at a particular time. Pie charts have a similar use. The circle represents the whole of something, and the slices are a proportion of the whole.
Being able to interpret charts and graphs accurately lets you see and understand some relationships more easily than in tables or in written explanations. This is especially true if the information is detailed or the relationships are complicated.
[ Learn the Skill
The following guidelines will help you interpret data that is presented as a graph or chart.
1.	Read the title to identify the subject and purpose. Remember what each type is designed to indicate. Also note how the subject relates to any printed material that accompanies it.
2.	Study the parts. Pay close attention to the labels. Note the units of measure. Identify the categories used. If there are different colors on bars or lines in the graph, determine what those colors represent.
3.	Analyze the data. Note any increases or decreases in quantities. Look for trends, changes, and other relationships in the data.
4.	Apply the information. Use the results of your analysis to draw conclusions. Ask yourself what
generalizations can be made about the trends, changes, or relationships shown.
5.	To create a chart or graph, research the information you want to include. Then draw the chart based on the data you find, using labels, colors, and a title that explain the data.
The graph below is a double-line graph. It shows both changes and relationships over time. This type of graph allows you to see how changes in one thing compare with changes in something else. Apply the guidelines to interpret the graph and answer the questions that follow.
1.	What is shown on each axis of this graph? What are the units of measure on each axis?
2.	What does each of the lines represent?
3.	What was the total population of the South in 1810? in 1850? By how much did the African American population grow during that period?
4.	Create a pie chart using the information in the graph.
430 CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER
13
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter. Then write a story about the information in the visual summary. Present your story orally to the class.
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Match the definition on the left with the correct term on the right.
1.	A region of cotton-producing areas that stretched from South Carolina to Texas
2.	Emotional songs that mixed African and European music and expressed religious beliefs
3.	Owners of small farms who made up the largest social class in the South
4.	Crop brokers who often managed the cotton trade in the South
5.	Wealthy farmers and plantation owners
a.	cotton belt
b.	factors
c.	planters
d.	spirituals
e.	yeomen
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 414-419)
6.	a. Describe How did the cotton gin lead to a cotton boom in the South?
b.	Analyze What were the positive and negative results of the cotton boom?
c.	Analyze How did the physical geography of the South influence the settlement and economy of the region?
d.	Evaluate Do you think that the South suffered as a result of its reliance on cotton? Why or why not?
SECTION 2 (Pages 420-423)
7.	a. Describe What three groups made up white southern society?
b. Compare and Contrast In what ways were the lives of free African Americans and white southerners similar and different?
THE SOUTH 4
c. Predict What might have been the attitude of yeomen and poor white southerners toward slavery? Why?
SECTION 3 (Pages 424-429)
8.	a. Identify What are some small ways in which slaves tried to challenge the slave system?
b.	Make Inferences How did religion and family help slaves cope with their lives? How has their culture influenced the U.S. today?
c.	Predict What could be some possible results of stronger strengthening of slave codes in the South?
Reading Skills
Online Research Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
9.	Which of the following would be the best Web site to find information about life in the South before the Civil War?
a.	a Civil War historian's homepage
b.	a collection of autobiographies written by slaves
c.	a site with information about how to grow cotton
d.	a collection of biographies of inventors
Using the Internet
10.	Activity: Writing Diary Entries Enslaved African Americans faced harsh working and living conditions. Many tried to escape the slave system. Using the online book, research the attempts by enslaved African Americans to reach the North and the people who assisted them. Imagine you were trying to help slaves travel to freedom. Write four entries into a diary. In each entry, describe your experiences. Include thumbnail maps to trace their trip.
I 71 hmhsocialstudies.coml
Reviewing Themes
11. Society and Culture How were the different social classes in the South affected by the cotton boom?
12.	Economics How did the cotton boom affect the economy of the South and the institution of slavery?
13.	Economics How did slavery affect the South?
Social Studies Skills
Interpreting and Creating Graphs and Charts Use the
Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the questions about the graph below.
U.S.
Cotton Production, ................
14.	What span of time saw the largest increase in cotton production?
a.	1800 to 1820	c. 1840 to 1860
b.	1820 to 1840	d. after 1860
15.	Organize the data in the graph into a short paragraph describing the rise in cotton production.
16.	Research the number of slaves in the South during the same time period and create a graph and a chart that illustrates your research findings. What questions can you ask that link the two visual sources? Organize the information on the graph and chart into a summary of your findings.
17.	Writing Your Biographical Sketch Look over your notes about life on a cotton farm. Then choose an imaginary person to write about. Think about what life would have been like for this person. What might he or she have looked like? How might he or she have spoken? What might a typical day have been like? Once you have answered these questions, write two paragraphs about a day in the life of this person.
432 CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. U.S.
Cotton Production, 1795-1805 The main reason for the changes shown in the graph was
A the invention and use of the cotton gin.
B a decline in the number of slaves.
C the end of the international slave trade.
D a switch from food crops to cash crops.
2	Which of the following helped enslaved African Americans to endure and survive slavery?
F their work G spirituals H slave codes J rebellions
3	Because some southerners feared farmers had become too reliant on cotton, they encouraged farmers to
A stop using the cotton gin.
B try growing a variety of cash crops.
C demand higher tariffs.
D introduce cotton and slavery to the West.
4	Which statement accurately describes southern society in the mid-1800s?
F
Very few white southerners owned slaves. G
Few white southerners owned the land they farmed.
H
Many African Americans in the South owned land. J
Most white southerners were small farmers. 5	Free African Americans in the South in the early and mid-1800s
A had the same rights and freedoms as white southerners.
B had few rights and freedoms.
C usually had escaped from slavery.
D could travel freely in their home states.
6	Examine the following passage from a northern woman’s journal of her stay in Georgia and then use it to answer the question below.
Z/On my return from the river I had a long and painful talk with Mr. Butler on the subject of the whipping of Teresa [a slave worn out from childbearing and field work, who asked the author to try to get her workload reduced]. Those discussions are terrible. They throw me into great distress [worry] for the slaves, whose position is completely hopeless; for myself, whose efforts on their behalf sometimes seem to me worse than useless; and for Mr. Butler, whose part in this horrible system fills me by turns with anger and pity/'
-Frances Anne Kemble, adapted from Journal of a Residence on a Georgian Plantation in 1838-1839
Document-Based Question What might be the differences between Kemble and Butler on the question of slavery?
THE SOUTH 43
0m
CHAPTER |	1815-1850
SON WR
Texas Essential Knowledge
and Skills (TEKS)
IOC, 11C, 12C, 12D, 13B, 19A, 20C, 21A, 22B, 23A, 23B,
23C, 23E, 24A, 24B, 25A, 25B, 25C, 26A, 26B, 26C, 27A, 27B, 28A, 28B, 29B
SECTION 1: Immigrants and Urban Challenges...............438
The Big Idea The population of the United States grew rapidly in the early 1800s with the arrival of millions of immigrants.
SECTION 2: American Arts.................................443
The Big Idea New movements in art and literature influenced many Americans in the early 1800s.
SECTION 3: Reforming Society.............................448
The Big Idea Reform movements in the early 1800s affected religion, education, and society.
SECTION 4: The Movement to End Slavery...................454
The Big Idea In the mid-1800s, debate over slavery increased as abolitionists organized to challenge slavery in the United States.
SECTION 5: Women's Rights................................461
The Big Idea Reformers sought to improve women's rights in American society.
m>'WriteSmart
1840
1850 r
Essential Question
What goals did American social reformers have during the early 1800s?
Persuasive Letter Your local newspaper is running a competition for students to answer the question, "What event or movement in history had the greatest impact on life in the United States?" This chapter tells about many important events and movements in the United States. As you read, take notes on each. Extend your notes with information from your teacher's lectures. Then decide which you believe has most affected life for people in the United States. Write a letter to the newspaper arguing your position. You will then read your letter as a persuasive speech to your class.
United
States
World
