CHAPTER 8
Reading Social Studies
Economics
Geography
Politics
Society	Science and
and Culture	Technology
Focus on Themes In this chapter you will learn about Thomas Jefferson's presidency. You will read what happened when Jefferson's first run to be president ended in a tie. After that, you will learn about his decision to buy Louisiana from the French,
see how he encouraged the exploration of the West, and discover why, during his second term, America found itself at war with Great Britain. You will see how America's expanding geography and politics were intertwined.
Making Generalizations
FOCUS on Reading As you read about different people and events, you probably notice some similarities among them. Seeing those similarities may lead you to make a generalization. A generalization is a broad, general idea drawn from new information combined with what you already know, such as your own experience. Notice how this process works with the following passage.
Lewis and Clark used the Missouri River as their highway through the unknown lands. As they moved upstream, a lookout on the boats kept a sharp eye out for sandbars and for tree stumps hidden underwater. When darkness fell, the weary explorers would pull their boats ashore. They cooked, wrote in their journals, and slept.
Swarms of gnats, flies, and mosquitoes often interrupted their sleep
-.............
Information gathered from the passage you are reading.	1 What you already know about + 1 the topic.	j =	Combine what you read with what you know to form a generalization.
	i					 i
The explorers had to cope with the dangers of the river and insects.	i When 1 have gone camping, 1 have needed a sleeping bag, ; cook stove, and warm clothes	j — ; to be comfortable.	j	Early explorers had to have endurance and many supplies to survive their travels.
Making a Generalization A generalization is similar to an inference because it is an educated guess that uses your background knowledge and the new information you are learning. You can also make generalizations about two people or events you have just discussed.
I CHAPTER 8
LK<gyWw»
People
You Try It!
Read the following passage and use it to answer the questions that follow.
Battles along the Canadian Border
American leaders hoped to follow up victories From
at sea with an overland invasion of Canada. Ch^pter„^' p. 284-285
Three attacks were planned—from Detroit, from Niagara Falls, and from up the Hudson River valley toward Montreal.
The attack from Detroit failed when British
soldiers and Indians led by Tecumseh captured Fort Detroit. The other American attacks failed when state militia troops refused to cross the Canadian border, arguing that they did not have to fight in a foreign country.
In 1813 the United States went on the attack again. A key goal was to break Britain's control of Lake Erie. The navy gave the task to Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry. After building a small fleet, Perry sailed out to meet the British on September 10, beginning the Battle of Lake Erie. The battle ended when the British surrendered. Perry sent a message to General William Henry Harrison: "We have met the enemy and they are ours." Perry's brilliant victory forced the British to withdraw, giving the U.S. Army control of the lake and new hope.
After you read the passage, answer the following questions.
1. What generalization can you make about the Canadian front during the War of 1812?
2. What generalization can you make about American soldiers during the War of 1812?
3. What generalization can you make about the War of 1812?
Chapter 8 Section 1
John Adams (p. 266) Thomas Jefferson Ip. 266) John Marshall (p. 270) Marbury v. Madison (p. 270) judicial review Ip. 270)
Section 2
Louisiana Purchase Ip. 274) Meriwether Lewis Ip. 275)
William Clark Ip. 275)
Lewis and Clark expedition (p. 275) Sacagawea (p. 276)
Zebulon Pike Ip. 276)
Section 3
USS
Constitution Ip. 278) impressment (p. 279) embargo Ip. 279) Embargo Act (p. 279) Non-Intercourse Act Ip. 280) Tecumseh (p. 280)
Battle of Tippecanoe (p. 282)
War Hawks (p. 282)
James Madison (p. 283) Section 4
Oliver Hazard Perry (p. 285)
Battle of Lake Erie (p. 285) Andrew Jackson (p. 286)
Treaty of Fort Jackson (p. 286) Battle of New Orleans (p. 286) Hartford Convention (p. 287) Treaty of Ghent (p. 287)
Academic Vocabulary
In this chapter you will learn the following academic words:
functions (p. 269)
consequences (p. 287)
j As you read Chapter 8, look for informa-\ tion that you can link together into a 5 generalization.
THE JEFFERSON ERA 265
SECTION


TEKS 5A, 5C, 18A, 18C, 22A
What You Will Learn...
Main Ideas
The election of 1800 marked the first peaceful transition in power from one political party to another.
President Jefferson's beliefs about the federal government were reflected in his policies. Marbury v. Madison increased the power of the judicial branch of government.
T
The Big Idea
Thomas Jefferson's election began a new era in American government.
Key Terms and People
John Adams, p. 266 Thomas Jefferson, p. 266 John Marshall, p.270 Marburyv. Madison, p. 270 judicial review, p. 270
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the election of 1800, Jefferson's beliefs and policies, and how the power of the judicial branch changed during Jefferson's time in office.
Jefferson Becomes President
If YOU were there...
You are a Maryland voter from a frontier district—and you are tired! For days, you and your friends have been wrangling over the presidential election. Who shall it be—John Adams or Thomas Jefferson? Your vote depends on your personal judgment.
Which candidate would you choose for president?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
John Adams had not been a popular president, but many still admired his ability and high principles. Both he and Thomas Jefferson had played major roles in winning independence and shaping the new government. Now, political differences sharply divided the two men and their supporters. In the election of 1800, voters were also divided. The Election of 1800
In the presidential election of 1800, Federalists John Adams and Charles C. Pinckney ran against Democratic-Republicans Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr. Each party believed that the American republic's survival depended upon the success of their candidates. With so much at stake, the election was hotly contested.
Unlike today, candidates did not travel around giving speeches. Instead, the candidates' supporters made their arguments in letters and newspaper editorials. Adams's supporters claimed that Jefferson was a pro-French radical. Put Jefferson in office, they warned, and the violence and chaos of the French Revolution would surely follow in the United States. Plus, Federalists argued, Jefferson's interest in science and philosophy proved that he wanted to destroy organized religion.
Democratic-Republican newspapers responded that Adams wanted to crown himself king. What else, they asked, could be the purpose of the Alien and Sedition Acts? Republicans also hinted that Adams would use the newly created permanent army to limit Americans' rights.
Ik*
6 CHAPTER 8
• Peaceful change of political power from one party to another The tied race led to the Twelfth Amendment (1804), which created
a separate ballot for president and vice president.
When the election results came in, Jefferson and Burr had won 73 electoral votes each to 65 for Adams and 64 for Pinckney. The Democratic-Republicans had won the election, but the tie between Jefferson and Burr caused a problem. Under the Constitution at that time, the two candidates with the most votes became president and vice president. The decision went to the House of Representatives, as called for in the Constitution.
The House, like the electoral college, also deadlocked. Days went by as vote after vote was called, each ending in ties. Exhausted lawmakers napped on the floor.
Jefferson finally won on the thirty-sixth
vote. The election marked the first time that
one party had replaced another in power in the United States. It is seen by some as the end of the early republic that began with the failure of the Articles of Confederation and creation of the Constitution. The election signaled that the new system of government would carry the nation through a peaceful transition of political power.
The problems with the voting system led Congress to propose the Twelfth Amendment. This amendment created a separate ballot for president and vice president.
Analyzing Information
What was significant about Jefferson’s victory?
READING CHECK .
THE JEFFERSON ERA 267
Primary Source

SPEECH
Jefferson's Inaugural Address
On March 4,1801, Thomas Jefferson gave his first inaugural address. In the following excerpt Jefferson describes his thoughts on the nation's future.
By using phrases like these, Jefferson tries to reassure his political opponents.
Here Jefferson states his opinion of what is essential to good government.
//Let us, then, fellow citizens, unite with one heart and one mind ...[E]very difference of opinion is not a difference of principle. We have called by different names brethren1 of the same principle. We are all republicans; we are all federalists.//
//Still one thing more, fellow citizens, a wise and frugal2 Government, which shall restrain men from injuring one
another, shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their n own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not
take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned. This is the sum of good government... //
ix!<-
1. brethren: brothers 2. frugal: thrifty
This phrase shows Jefferson's determination to keep government small.
analysis
SKILL} ANALYZING PRIMARYSOURCES
What words and phrases indicate Jefferson's support for a small national government?
THE IMPACT
TODAY
A monument to Thomas Jefferson was completed in 1943 and is one of the most frequently visited sites in Washington, D.C.
Jefferson's Policies
When Jefferson took office, he brought with him a style and political ideas different from those of Adams and Washington. Jefferson was less formal than his predecessors, and he wanted to limit the powers of government.
Jefferson Is Inaugurated
Americans looked forward with excitement to Jefferson's first speech as president. People from across the nation gathered in the new capital, Washington, D.C., to hear him. Curious travelers looked with pride at the partially completed Capitol building and at the executive mansion (not yet called the White House). The two buildings dominated the surrounding homes and forests.
Small businesses dotted the landscape. At one of these, a modest boardinghouse, the president-elect was putting the finishing touches on his speech. On the morning of March 4, 1801, he left the boardinghouse and walked to the Capitol. The leader of a republic, Jefferson believed, should not ride in fancy carriages.
Jefferson read his speech in a quiet voice.
He wanted to make it clear that he supported
the will of the majority. He also stressed the need for a limited government and the protection of civil liberties.
From these humble surroundings in which Jefferson delivered his speech, Washington eventually grew into a large and impressive city. Over the years, the Capitol and the executive mansion were joined by other state buildings and monuments. Jefferson, who had long dreamed of a new national capital that would be independent of the interests of any one state, was pleased to be a part of this process of building a federal city.
Jefferson in Office
President Jefferson faced the task of putting his republican ideas into practice. One of his first actions was to select the members of his cabinet. His choices included James Madison as secretary of state and Albert Gallatin as secretary of the treasury.
Jefferson would also benefit from the Democratic-Republican Party's newly won control of both houses of Congress. At Jefferson's urging, Congress allowed the hated Alien and Sedition Acts to expire. Jefferson
I CHAPTER 8
lowered military spending and reduced the size of the army. The navy was cut to seven active ships. Jefferson and Gallatin hoped that saving this money would allow the government to repay the national debt. Jefferson also asked Gallatin to find ways to get rid of domestic taxes, like the tax on whiskey. The Democratic-Republican-led Congress passed the laws needed to carry out these policies.
The entire national government in 1801 consisted only of several hundred people. Jefferson preferred to keep it that way. He believed that the primary functions of the federal government were to protect the nation from foreign threats, deliver the mail, and collect customs duties.
Jefferson did recognize that some of the Federalist policies—such as the creation of the Bank of the United States—should be kept. Although Jefferson had battled Hamilton over the Bank, as president he agreed to leave it in place.
Reading Check
Summarizing What policy changes did Democratic-Republicans introduce, and which Federalist policies did Jefferson keep?
Marbury v. Madison
Although Republicans controlled the presi-
dency and Congress, Federalists dominated
the federal judiciary. In an effort to continue
their control over the judiciary, Federalist
legislators passed the Judiciary Act of 1801
shortly before their terms of office ended.
This act created 16 new federal judgeships
that President Adams filled with Federalists
before leaving office. The Republican press
called these people midnight judges, arguing
that Adams had packed the judiciary with Academic
Federalists the night before he left office.
°	functions
Some of these appointments were made uses Or purposes so late that the documents that authorized them had not been delivered by the time Adams left office. This led to controversy once Jefferson took office. William Marbury, named as a justice of the peace by President Adams, did not receive his documents before Adams left office. When Jefferson took office, Marburydemandedthedocuments. On Jefferson's advice, however, the new secretary of state, James Madison, refused to deliver them. Jefferson argued that the appointment of the midnight judges was not valid.
Marbury v. Madison (1803)
Background of the Case Shortly before Thomas Jefferson took office, John Adams had appointed William Marbury to be a justice of the peace. Adams had signed Marbury's commission, but it was never delivered. Marbury sued to force Madison to give him the commission.
The Court's Ruling
The Court ruled that the law Marbury based his claim on was unconstitutional.
The Court's Reasoning
The Judiciary Act of 1789 gave the Supreme Court the authority to hear a wide variety of cases, including those like Marbury's. But the Supreme Court ruled that Congress did not have the power to make such a law. Why? Because the Constitution limits the types of cases the Supreme Court can hear. Thus, the law was in conflict with the Constitution and had to be struck down.
Why It Matters
Marburyv. Madison was important for several reasons. It confirmed the Supreme Court's power to declare acts of \ Congress unconstitutional. By doing so, it established the Court as the final authority on the Constitution.
This helped make the judicial branch of government equal to the other two branches. Chief Justice John Marshall and later federal judges would use this power of judicial review as a check on the legislative and executive branches.
A NA
lys I s SKILL ANALYZING INFORMATION
i 1.	What do you think it means to be the final authority on the Constitution?
2.	How did Marburyv. Madison affect the Constitution's system of checks and balances?
THE JEFFERSON ERA 269
Marbury brought suit, asking the Supreme Court to order Madison to deliver the papers.
Marbury claimed that the Judiciary Act of 1789 gave the Court the power to do so.
John Marshall, a Federalist appointed by John Adams, was the chief justice of the Court.
Marshall and President Jefferson disagreed about many political issues. When Marshall agreed to hear Marbury's case, Jefferson protested, saying that the Federalists "have retired into the judiciary as a stronghold." Marshall wrote the Court's opinion in Marbury v. Madison, a case that helped establish the Supreme Court's power to check the power of the other branches of government. The Constitution, Marshall noted, gave the Court authority to hear only certain types of cases. A request like Marbury's was not one of them. The law that Marbury's case depended upon was, therefore, unconstitutional.
In denying Marbury's request in this way, the Court avoided a direct confrontation with Jefferson's administration. But more impor-
John Marshall
tant, it established the Court's power of judicial review, the power to declare an act of Congress unconstitutional. Marshall and later federal judges would use this power to make the judiciary a much stronger
part of the national government. Under Marshall's leadership, the Court gained additional power by beginning to issue only one decision in a case. In British courts, each justice provided a separate decision. The system of one decision gave the courts more authority. In response to Marbury, Jefferson urged Congress to impeach Justice Samuel Chase. The Congress held the impeachment trial, but Chase was acquitted.
Analyzing Information
Why was Marburyv. Madison an important ruling?
■ Summary and preview a peaceful I transfer of power took place after the election of 1800. In the next section you
will read about the Louisiana Purchase.
READING CHECK ,
Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What were the political parties in the election of 1800, and who were their candidates? b. Analyze Why was the election of 1800 significant? What years made up the era of the early republic? What caused the early republic to form, and what were some of its effects?
2.	a. Describe What ideas for government did Thomas Jefferson stress in his inaugural address?
b.	Compare and Contrast What similarities and differences did Jefferson's Republican government have with the previous Federalist one?
c.	Elaborate Defend Jefferson's preference for keeping the national government small.
3.	a. Identify How did John Marshall help lead the new nation?
b.	Draw Conclusions Why is the power of judicial review important?
c.	Predict How might the Marbury v. Madison
ruling affect future actions by Congress? How might it affect the lives of Americans?
Critical Thinking
4.	Categorizing Review your notes on Jefferson's beliefs and policies. Then copy the graphic organizer below and show how Jefferson brought change through his policies.
Jefferson as President
Federalist Policies	Republican Policies
	
	
	
5.	Gathering Ideas about a Person's
Accomplishments Look back through what you have just read to see what you have learned about Jefferson's decisions in office. Make a list of the traits you think each decision shows in Jefferson.
0 CHAPTER 8
Biography
KEY EVENTS
Thomas Jefferson
How would you inspire people to seek freedom?
When did he live? He was born on April 13,1743. He died on July 4,1826, within hours of the death of President John Adams, his rival and friend. The date was also the fiftieth anniversary of the Declaration of Independence.
Where did he live? He was born in Albemarle County, Virginia, where he inherited a large estate from his father. At age 26 he began building his elegant lifetime home, Monticello, which he designed himself. He spent much of his life away from home, in Philadelphia; Washington, D.C.; and Europe. Yet he always longed to return to his peaceful home.
What did he do? Jefferson wanted only three of his accomplishments listed on his tomb: author of the Declaration of American Independence, author of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and Father of the University of Virginia. What did he not mention? Governor of Virginia, lawyer, Revolutionary leader, writer, philosopher, inventor, architect, plant scientist, book collector, musician, astronomer, ambassador, secretary of state—and, of course, president of the United States.
Why is he important? Jefferson's powerful words in the Declaration of Independence have inspired people throughout the world to seek freedom, equality, and self-rule. His most celebrated achievement as president (1801-1809) was the purchase of the Louisiana Territory from France. The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 nearly doubled the size of the United States. Jefferson then sponsored the Lewis and Clark expedition to explore this new territory. His leadership is remembered for his keen intelligence, commitment to democracy, and foresight.
Evaluating Why has Thomas Jefferson been a hero to generations of Americans?
1767 Begins practicing law in Virginia
1769-1776 Serves in Virginia House of Burgesses
1776 Drafts the first version of the Declaration of Independence
1789 Appointed secretary of state by George Washington
1801 Inaugurated as president
1803 Authorizes the purchase of Louisiana from France
$ 1809 Retires to Monticello
Thomas Jefferson wrote the Declaration of Independence and later served as president of the United States.
THE JEFFERSON ERA 271
SECTION
2
TEKS 1C,5A,5E,6E,10A,10B,11A
What You Will Learn...
. As American settlers moved west, control of the Mississippi River became more important to the United States.
. The Louisiana Purchase almost doubled the size of the United States.
. Expeditions led by Lewis, Clark, and Pike increased Americans' understanding of the West.
Under President Jefferson's leadership, the United States added the Louisiana Territory.
Key Terms and People
Louisiana Purchase, p. 274
Meriwether Lewis, p. 275
William Clark, p. 275
Lewis and Clark expedition, p. 275
Sacagawea, p.276
Zebulon Pike, p. 276
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES
j Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the events leading up to the Louisiana Purchase and the exploration that followed.
The Louisiana Purchase
If YOU were there...
You and your family live on a small farm in Kentucky in about 1800. Raised on the frontier, you are a skillful hunter and trapper. One day at the trading post, you see a poster calling for volunteers to join the Corps of Discovery.This expedition will explore the vast region west of the Mississippi River. You think it would be exciting—but dangerous. You might never come home.
Would you volunteer to join the Corps of Discovery?
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
As the 1800s began, the United States I was expanding steadily westward. More lands were opened, and w settlers moved in to occupy them. Americans were also curious about the vast lands that lay farther west Adventurous explorers organized expeditions to find out more about those lands.
American Settlers Move West
By the early 1800s, thousands of Americans settled in the area between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River. As the region's population grew, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Ohio were admitted to the Union. Settlers in these states depended upon the Mississippi and Ohio rivers to move their products to eastern markets.
New Orleans, located at the mouth of the Mississippi, was a very important port. Its busy docks were filled with settlers' farm products and valuable furs bought from American Indians. Many of these cargoes were then sent to Europe. At the same time, manufactured goods passed through the port on their way upriver. As American dependence on the river grew, Jefferson began to worry that a foreign power might shut down access to New Orleans.
There is on the globe one single spot, the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy. It is New Orleans, through which the produce of three-eighths of our territory must pass to market/'
—Thomas Jefferson, quoted in Annals of America, Volume4,1797-1820
2 CHAPTER 8
■
Spain controlled both New Orleans and Louisiana. This region stretched west from the mighty Mississippi River to the great Rocky Mountains. Although Spain owned Louisiana, Spanish officials found it impossible to keep Americans out of the territory. "You can't put doors on open country," the foreign minister said in despair.
Years of effort failed to improve Spain's position. Under a secret treaty, Spain agreed to trade Louisiana to France, passing the problem on to someone else. One Spanish officer expressed his relief. "I can hardly wait to leave them [the Americans] behind me," he said.
Analyzing Information
Why was New Orleans important to settlers in the western regions of the United States?
Reading Check ,
Louisiana
In 1802, just before handing over Louisiana to France, Spain closed New Orleans to American shipping. Angry farmers worried about what this would do to the economy. President Jefferson asked the U.S. ambassador to France, Robert R. Livingston, to try to buy New Orleans. Jefferson sent James Monroe to help Livingston.
Napoleon and Louisiana
France was led by Napoleon (nuh-POH-lee-uhn) Bonaparte, a powerful ruler who had conquered most of Europe. He wished to rebuild France's empire in North America.
Napoleon's strategy was to use the French colony of Haiti, in the Caribbean, as a supply
THE JEFFERSON ERA 273
base. From there he could send troops to Louisiana. However, enslaved Africans had revolted and freed themselves from French rule.
Napoleon sent troops to try to regain control of the island, but they were defeated in 1802. This defeat ended his hopes of rebuilding a North American empire.
Jefferson Buys Louisiana
The American ambassador got a surprising offer during his negotiations with French foreign minister Charles Talleyrand. When the Americans tried to buy New Orleans, Talleyrand offered to sell all of Louisiana.
With his hopes for a North American empire dashed, Napoleon had turned his attention back to Europe. France was at war with Great Britain, and Napoleon needed money for military supplies. He also hoped that a larger United States would challenge British power.
Livingston and Monroe knew a bargain when they saw one. They quickly accepted the French offer to sell Louisiana for $15 million.
The news pleased Jefferson. But as a strict constructionist, he was troubled. The Constitution did not mention the purchase of foreign lands, and he did not want to expand the power of the federal government. He also did not like spending large amounts of public money. Nevertheless, Jefferson agreed to the purchase in the belief that doing so was best for the country.
On October 20,1803, the Senate approved the Louisiana Purchase agreement, which roughly doubled the size of the United States. With the $15 million in the French treasury, Napoleon boasted, "I have given England a rival who, sooner or later, will humble her pride."
READING CHECK
Making Inferences
Why was the Louisiana Purchase important to the future of the United States?
The Journey West
The time line and photographs you see here show some of the key events and places of the Lewis and Clark expedition. Read the journal entries to get an idea of what the explorers faced.
HISTORY
VIDEO
Winter with the Mandan
71 hmhsocialstudies.c
A large keelboat and two smaller boats were needed to get the supply-heavy expedition moving west.
Small boats helped the travelers move supplies across the Great Plains.
May 14,1804 1
August 3,1804
October 1804 - April 1805
The expedition begins near St. Louis.
The first official council between representatives of the United States and Plains Indians is held.
The expedition establishes Fort Mandan to spend the winter. There, the explorers meet a French fur trader and his wife, Sacagawea.
April7,1805 We,wre>ri}euttopeMired»wa>Msirvai:lea£t2,000 miles
ist width, on,whichtkifootof cuddled	trodden,(whtked wpcth).
-Meriwether Lewis
4 CHAPTER 8
Explorers Head West
Americans knew little about western Native Americans or the land they lived on. President Jefferson wanted to learn more about the people and land of the West. He also wanted to see if there was a river route that could be taken to the Pacific Ocean.
Lewis and Clark Expedition
In 1803 the president asked Congress to fund an expedition to explore the West. To lead it, he chose former army captain Meriwether Lewis. Lewis then chose his friend Lieutenant William Clark to be the co-leader of the expedition.
To prepare for the journey, Lewis spent weeks studying with experts about plants, surveying, and other subjects. This knowledge would allow him to take careful notes on what
he saw. With Clark, Lewis carefully selected about 50 skilled frontiersmen to join the Corps of Discovery, as they called their group.
In May 1804 the Lewis and Clark expedition began its long journey to explore the Louisiana Purchase. The Corps of Discovery traveled up the Missouri River to the village of St. Charles. Once past this village the men would receive no more letters, fresh supplies, or reinforcements.
Lewis and Clark used the Missouri River as their highway through the unknown lands. As they moved upstream, a lookout on the boats kept a sharp eye out for sandbars and for tree stumps hidden underwater. When darkness fell, the weary explorers would pull their boats ashore. They cooked, wrote in their journals, and slept. Swarms of gnats, flies, and mosquitoes often interrupted their sleep.
August 12, i3Q5f——— September 1805	November 7,1805
Lewis climbs the first ridge to the Continental Divide.
The expedition nearly starves. Local peoples help the explorers.
The expedition reaches a bay of the Pacific Ocean.
August23,1805 Th& htiU or
were, Mt tik& those, t kwh se&b, but tike,
the, side, of a, tree, straight ufk
-WtitiwusClark
ANALYSIS
SKILLS READING TIME LINES
On what date did the explorers reach the
westernmost point of their journey?
_____________"___________.___________________/
THE JEFFERSON ERA 275
Primary Source
JOURNAL ENTRY
September 17,1804,
Great Plains
While traveling across the Great Plains, Meriwether Lewis marveled at the richness of the land.
"The shortness... of gross gave the plain the appearance throughout its whole extent of besnuti-ful bowling-green let fine order... this scenery, already rick, pleasing, and beautiful uras still farther heightened by immense herds of Buffoloe, deer Elk and Antelopes which we saw in every dlredtion feeding ok the hills and plains, I do not think I exaggerate when I estimate the number of Buffalo which could be cousprejhendJed at one view to amount to 3000.”
—Meriwether Lewis, quoted in Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, edited by Reuben BoldTheraites
ANALYSIS
SKILL I
Analyzing Primary Sources What did Lewis find so impressive about the Great Plains?
Insects were not the only cause of sleeplessness for the Corps of Discovery. As weeks passed without seeing any Native Americans, the explorers wondered what their first encounter would be like.
Contact with Native Americans
During the summer of 1804 the Corps of Discovery had pushed more than 600 miles upriver without seeing any Native Americans. But when the men spotted huge buffalo herds in the distance, they guessed that Indian groups would be nearby. Many Indian groups depended on the buffalo for food, clothing, and tools.
Lewis used interpreters to talk to the leaders of each of the peoples they met. He told them that the United States now owned the land on which they lived. Yet the explorers relied on the good will of the people they met. Sacagawea (sak-uh-juh-wee-uh),
a Shoshone from the Rocky Mountains, accompanied the group with her husband, a French fur trader who lived with the Mandan Indians and served as a guide and interpreter. Sacagawea helped the expedition by naming plants and by gathering edible fruits and vegetables for the group. At one point, the group met with Sacagawea's brother, who provided horses and a guide to lead the expedition across the mountains.
After crossing the Rockies, Lewis and Clark followed the Columbia River. Along the way they met the powerful Nez Perce. Like the Shoshone, the Nez Perce provided the expedition with food. At last, in November 1805, Lewis and Clark reached the Pacific Ocean. The explorers stayed in the Pacific Northwest during the rough winter. In March 1806 Lewis and Clark set out on the long trip home.
Lewis and Clark had not found a river route across the West to the Pacific Ocean. But they had learned much about western lands and paths across the Rockies. The explorers also established contact with many Native American groups and collected much valuable information about western plants and animals. Pike's Exploration
In 1806 a young army officer named Zebulon Pike was sent on another mission to the West. He was ordered to find the starting point of the Red River. This was important because the United States considered the Red River to be a part of the Louisiana Territory's western border with New Spain.
Heading into the Rocky Mountains, in present-day Colorado, Pike tried to reach the summit of the mountain now known as Pikes Peak. In 1807 he traveled into Spanish-held lands until Spanish cavalry arrested him. They suspected Pike of being a spy. When he was finally released, he returned to the United States and reported on his trip. Despite his imprisonment, he praised the opportunities for doing business with the Spanish in the Southwest. Pike's
5 CHAPTER 8
Linking
to Today
The Louisiana Purchase
When the Corps of Discovery headed west in 1804, an estimated 30 million buffalo roamed the plains alongside 97,000 people, mostly Native Americans. Since that time the numbers have reversed. Today nearly 40 million people call the lands of the Louisiana Purchase home, In contrast, the buffalo, which had been driven nearly
to extinction by the late 1800s, has recovered to a population of approximately 15,000 in the wild.
ANALYSIS
SKILL; ANALYZING INFORMATION
Other than agricultural goods, what types of valuable resources are found in the former Louisiana Purchase?
Natural Resources oil, natural gas, coal, gemstones, copper, iron ore, lead, zinc, silver, limestone, sulphur, diamonds, helium
Major Agricultural and Livestock Production
rice, cattle, chicken, hogs, corn, wheat, sugarcane, cotton, dairy products, hay
Louisiana Purchase
I
y
report offered many Americans their first
description of the Southwest.	■ SUMMARY AND PREVIEW The Louisiana
I
Purchase nearly doubled the size of the Supporting a Point of View United States. In the next section you will What would you do if you were Pike and found	learn about increasing tensions between
yourself in Spanish territory?	the United States and Great Britain.
reading Check .
Section 2 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com

Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What new states were added to
the Union by the early 1800s? What happened in 1803 that changed the nation dramatically? b. Explain Why were New Orleans and the Mississippi River important to settlers in the West?
2.	a. Recall What two reasons did Napoleon have for selling Louisiana to the United States?
b.	Summarize Why was the Louisiana Purchase important to the national security and stable economy of the United States?
c.	Predict What are some possible results of expansion into the Louisiana Purchase?
3.	a. Describe What areas did the Lewis and Clark expedition and the Pike expedition explore?
b. Draw Conclusions Why were Meriwether Lewis and William Clark chosen to lead the exploration of the Louisiana Purchase?
Critical Thinking
4.	Sequencing Review your notes on the Louisiana Purchase.Then copy the graphic organizer below and use it to rank the three most important effects of the Louisiana Purchase, from most important to least important, and explain why you chose that order.
Importance	Why
1. 2. 3.	
’’^WriteSmart
5.	Gathering Information about a Person's Actions
Make a list of Jefferson's actions—the ones that would put him on that top-ten list. Add any new character traits you have discovered.
THE JEFFERSON ERA 277
What You Will Learn...
1.	Violations of U.S. neutrality led Congress to enact a ban on trade.
2.	Native Americans, Great Britain, and the United States came into conflict in the West.
3.	The War Hawks led a growing call for war with Great Britain.
i............. ..........-.........J
Challenges at home and abroad led the United States to declare
war on Great Britain.
_________________________________J
Key Terms and People
USS
Constitution, p. 278 impressment, p. 279 embargo, p. 279 Embargo Act, p. 279 Non-Intercourse Act, p. 280 Tecumseh, p. 280 Battle of Tippecanoe, p. 282 War Hawks, p. 282 James Madison, p. 283 | hmhsocialstudies.com
TAKING NOTES I
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the challenges that led the United States to declare war on Great Britain.
The Coming of War
If YOU were there...
You are a tea merchant in Boston in 1807, but right now a new law forbids trading with European nations. Boston Harbor is full of empty ships. It seems to you that the law is hurting American merchants more than European ones! You know that some are breaking the law and smuggling goods, just to stay in business.
Would you obey the law or smuggle?
BUILDING BACKGROUND
The United States tried to stay neutral in the conflicts between France and Great Britain, but it was impossible to avoid getting involved. French and British ships interfered with American trade across the Atlantic. The British also caused trouble along the western frontier. Many Americans began to urge war with Great Britain. Violations of Neutrality
During the late 1700s and early 1800s, American merchant ships fanned out across the oceans. The overseas trade, while profitable, was also risky. Ships had to travel vast distances, often through violent storms. Merchant ships sailing in the Mediterranean risked capture by pirates from the Barbary States of North Africa, who would steal cargo and hold ships' crews for ransom. The young United States had no formal navy to protect these ships. Congress provided money for just six ships, but the ships were designed to compete against the largest navies in the world. Attacks continued until the United States sent the USS Constitution, a large warship, to end them.
The Barbary pirates were a serious problem, but an even larger threat soon loomed. When Great Britain and France went to war in 1803, each country wanted to stop the United States from supplying goods to the other. Each government passed laws designed to prevent American merchants from trading with the other. In addition, the British and French navies captured many American merchant ships searching for war supplies.
The real trouble, however, started when Britain began stopping and searching American ships for sailors who had run away from the British navy, forcing the sailors to return to British ships. Sometimes U.S. citizens were captured by accident and pressed into
The USS Constitution
CONNECT TO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
1.	Why do you think gunpowder was stored on the bottom deck?
2.	What was the purpose of the copper sheathing?
Boys called "powder monkeys" carried gunpowder from the orlop, or lowest, deck up to the gunners.
In the early years of the republic, foreign trade was critical to the nation's survival. In 1797 Congress decided to create a navy to protect American merchant ships. The powerful warship USS Constitution was a key part of the new navy and was undefeated in battle. It is the oldest commissioned warship in the world.
service. This impressment, or the practice of forcing people to serve in the army or navy, continued despite American protests.
Soon Britain was even targeting American navy ships. In June 1807, for example, the British ship Leopard stopped the U.S. Navy ship Chesapeake and tried to remove sailors. When the captain of the Chesapeake refused, the British took the sailors by force. The brazen attack on the Chesapeake stunned Americans.
The Embargo Act
Great Britain's violations of U.S. neutrality
sparked intense debate in America about how
to respond. Some people wanted to go to war.
Others favored an embargo, or the banning of trade, against Britain. Without a strong navy, many feared that the young nation would be unable to defend its independence in a fight against the largest navy in the world.
Jefferson, who had easily won re-election in 1804, supported an embargo. At his urging, in late 1807 Congress passed the Embargo Act. The law essentially banned trade with all foreign countries. American ships could not sail to foreign ports. American ports were also closed to British ships. Congress hoped that the embargo would punish Britain and France and protect American merchant ships from capture.
The effect of the law was devastating to American merchants. Without foreign trade,
THE JEFFERSON ERA 279
they lost enormous amounts of money. Northern states that relied heavily on trade were especially hard hit by the embargo. Congressman Josiah Quincy of Massachusetts, in a speech before Congress, described the situation. "All the business of the nation is in disorder. All the nation's industry is at a standstill," he said. The free enterprise system of economics was becoming more important to the financial well-being of merchants and other Americans, and many did not want government policies to interfere with trade.
The embargo damaged Jefferson's popularity and strengthened the Federalist Party. Angry merchants sent Jefferson hundreds of petitions demanding the Embargo Act's repeal. One New Englander said the embargo was like "cutting one's throat to stop the nosebleed." Even worse, the embargo had little effect on Britain and France.
Non-Intercourse Act
In 1809 Congress tried to revive the nation's trade by replacing the unpopular act with the Non-Intercourse Act. This new law banned trade only with Britain, France, and their colonies. It also stated that the United States would resume trading with the first side that stopped violating U.S. neutrality. In time, however, the law was no more successful than the Embargo Act.
Comparing and Contrasting
In what ways were the Embargo Act and the Non-Intercourse Act similar and different?
READING CHECK .
Conflict in the West
Disagreements between Great Britain and the United States went beyond the neutrality issue. In the West, the British and Native Americans again clashed with American settlers over land.
The Conflict over Land
In the early 1800s, Native Americans in the old Northwest Territory continued to lose land as thousands of settlers poured into the region. The United States had gained this land in the Treaty of Greenville, but Indian leaders who had not agreed to the treaty protested the settlers' arrival. Frustrated Indian groups considered what to do. In the meantime, Britain saw an opportunity to slow America's westward growth. British agents from Canada began to arm Native Americans who were living along the western frontier. Rumors of British activity in the old Northwest Territory quickly spread, filling American settlers with fear and anger.
Tecumseh Resists U.S. Settlers
Soon an Indian leader emerged who seemed more than capable of halting the American settlers. Tecumseh (tuh-KUHM-suh), a Shawnee chief, had watched angrily as Native Americans were pushed off their land. A brilliant speaker, he warned other Indians about the dangers they faced from settlers. He believed that the Native Americans had to do what white Americans had done: unite.

Primary Source
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
POLITICAL CARTOON
The Embargo Act
The unpopularity of the Embargo Act prompted political cartoonists to show visually how the act was hurting American trade.
! What do you think ; the turtle represents?
| What is the turtle j preventing this J man from doing?
Analyzing primary sources
How does the cartoonist emphasize the unpopularity of the Embargo Act?
Tecumseh hoped to unite the Native Americans of the northwestern frontier, the South, and the eastern Mississippi Valley. He was helped by his brother, a religious leader called the Prophet. They founded a village called Prophetstown near the Wabash and Tippecanoe rivers for their followers.
The Battle of Tippecanoe
The governor of the Indiana Territory, William Henry Harrison, watched Tecumseh's activities with alarm. Harrison called him "one of those uncommon geniuses which spring up occasionally to . . . overturn the
established order." The governor was convinced that Tecumseh had British backing. If true, Tecumseh could be a serious threat to American power in the West.
In 1810 Tecumseh met face to face with Harrison. The governor urged him to follow the Treaty of Greenville that had been signed in 1795. Tecumseh replied, "The white people have no right to take the land from the Indians, because the Indians had it first." No single chief, he insisted, could sell land belonging to all American Indians who used it. In response, Harrison warned Tecumseh not to resist the power of the United States.

■W
ANALYSIS j
SKILL! READING TIME LINES

Primary Source
POINTS OF VIEW
Views of War
Tecumseh urged Native Americans to unite to oppose what he called the "evil" of white settlement.
^The only way to stop this evil is for all the red men to unite in claiming a common and equal right to the land, as it was at first, and should be yet. Before, the land never was divided, but belonged to all, for the use of each person. No group had a right to sell, not even to each other, much less to strangers who want all and will not do with less/J
—Tecumseh
William Henry Harrison was proud of his efforts to obtain land for settlers.
//By my own exertions in securing the friendship of the chiefs... by admitting them at all times to my house and table, my propositions for the purchase of their lands were successful beyond my...hopes...In the course of seven years
s the Indian title was extinguished to the amount of fifty millions of acres.//
—William Henry Harrison

How did Harrison's and Tecumseh's views on western settlement differ?

FOCUS ON
Reading What generalization can you make about the views on going to war?
Tecumseh traveled south to ask the Creek nation to join his forces. In his absence, Harrison attacked. Harrison raised an army and marched his troops close to Prophetstown. Fighting broke out when the Prophet ordered an attack on Harrison's camp on November 7, 1811.
The Indians broke through army lines, but Harrison kept a "calm, cool, and collected" manner, according to one observer. During the all-day battle, Harrison's soldiers forced the Indian warriors to retreat and then destroyed Tecumseh's village. Said Chief Shabbona, "With the smoke of that town and loss of that battle, I lost all hope." Although Tecumseh was safe, U.S. forces defeated Tecumseh and his followers in the Battle of Tippecanoe. The defeat destroyed Tecumseh's dream of a great Indian confederation. He fled to Canada. The Prophet was removed from power for ordering the failed attack.
READING CHECK _
Finding Main Ideas Why were U.S. officials worried about Tecumseh's actions?
Call for War
The evidence of British support for Tecumseh further inflamed Americans. A Democratic-Republican newspaper declared, "The war on the Wabash [River] is purely BRITISH." Many Americans felt that Britain had encouraged Tecumseh to attack settlers in the West.
The War Hawks
Several young members of Congress—called War Hawks by their opponents—took the lead in calling for war against Britain. These legislators, most of whom were from the South and West, were led by Henry Clay of Kentucky, John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, and Felix Grundy of Tennessee. They saw war as the only answer to British insults. "If we submit," Calhoun warned, "the independence of this nation is lost." Calls for war grew. The War Hawks wanted to put a stop to British influence among Native Americans and enforce national security. They also wanted to invade Canada and
I CHAPTER 8
gain more land for settlement. Others were angered by British trade restrictions that hurt southern planters and western farmers. War Hawks gave emotional speeches urging Americans to stand up to Great Britain.
The Opposition
The strongest opponents of the War Hawks were New England Federalists. British trade restrictions and impressment had hurt New England's economy. People there wanted to renew friendly business ties with Britain instead of fighting another war.
Other politicians argued that war with Great Britain would be foolish. They feared that the United States was not yet ready to fight powerful Britain. America's army and navy were small and poorly equipped compared to Britain's military. In addition, Americans could produce only a fraction of the military supplies Britain could. Senator Obadiah German of New York pleaded with the War Hawks to be patient: "Prior to any declaration of war... my plan would be, and my first wish is, to prepare for it—to put the country in complete armor."
Declaring War
Republican James Madison was elected president in 1808. He faced the difficulty of continuing an unpopular trade war begun by Jefferson. He also felt growing pressure from the War Hawks. By 1812 he decided that Congress must vote on war. Speaking to Congress, Madison blasted Great Britain's conduct. He asked Congress to decide how the nation should respond.
When Congress voted a few days later, the War Hawks won. For the first time in the nation's brief history, Congress had declared war. Months later, Americans elected Madison to a second term. He would serve as commander in chief during the War of 1812.
READING CHECK
Summarizing Why did the United States declare war in 1812?
I
Summary and Preview Conflicts on I the frontier and with Great Britain dominated U.S. foreign policy under Jefferson and Madison. In the next section you will read about the War of 1812.
Section 3 Assessment
, 9^ hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Describe In what ways did the war between France and Britain cause problems for the United States?
b.	Make Inferences What were the reasons for the failure of the Embargo Act?
c.	Elaborate Why do you think Jefferson's foreign policy of embargoes against Britain and France failed?
2.	a. Describe What was Tecumseh's goal?
b.	Explain What role did Great Britain play in the conflict between the United States and American Indians on the western frontier?
c.	Identify How was the conflict between Native Americans and western settlers resolved?
3.	a. Identify Who were the War Hawks? Why did they support war with Britain?
b. Elaborate Would you have supported going to
war against Great Britain? Explain your answer.
Critical Thinking
4. Categorizing Review your notes on the causes that led to the War of 1812. Were most challenges foreign or domestic? Categorize them in a chart like the one below.
Foreign	Domestic
	
myWriteSmart
5. Taking Notes Take notes about any of Jefferson's actions and character traits you can identify during the buildup to war with Britain. Save this information for the top-ten list you will create at the end of the chapter.
THE JEFFERSON ERA 283


4
The cMF 1812
SECTION
gSg TEKS 5A,5C,5D,5E,13A,14B, 20C, 22B
What You Will Learn...
. American forces held their own against the British in the early battles of the war.
, U.S. forces stopped British offensives in the East and South. , The effects of the war included prosperity and national pride.
If YOU were there...
It's 1812, and the United States and Great Britain are at war.
You are a sailor on an American merchant ship that has been licensed as a privateer. Your ship's mission will be to chase and capture ships of the mighty British navy. Even with the help of merchant ships like yours, the American navy is badly outnumbered.
You know you face danger and may not survive.
Do you think your mission will succeed?
Great Britain and the United States went to battle in the War of 1812.
Key Terms and People
Oliver Hazard Perry, p. 285 Battle of Lake Erie, p. 285 Andrew Jackson, p. 286 Treaty of Fort Jackson, p. 286 Battle of New Orleans, p. 286 Hartford Convention, p. 287 Treaty of Ghent, p. 287
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES I
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the sequence of events in the War of 1812, from beginning to end.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
Anger against Great Britain's actions I finally provoked the United States into the War of 1812. Britain’s great navy gave it a clear advantage at sea, but the war was also fought on i several other fronts. Victories in major battles along the frontier gave j
' Americans a new sense of unity.	:
— •». ..........................
Early Battles
In the summer of 1812 the United States found itself in a war with one of the world's most powerful nations. Despite the claims by the War Hawks, the War of 1812 would not be a quick and easy fight.
War at Sea
When the war began, the British navy had hundreds of ships. In contrast, the U.S. Navy had fewer than 20 ships. None of them was as powerful as the greatest British warships.
Most of the British navy's ships, however, were scattered around the globe. Although small, the U.S. Navy had well-trained sailors and powerful new warships such as the USS Constitution. American vessels defeated British ships several times in one-on-one duels. Such victories embarrassed the British and raised American morale. Eventually, the British ships blockaded America's seaports.
Battles Along the Canadian Border
American leaders hoped to follow up victories at sea with an overland invasion of Canada. Three attacks were planned—from Detroit, from Niagara Falls, and from up the Hudson River valley toward Montreal.
CHAPTER 8
TheWar of 1812
The attack from Detroit failed when British soldiers and Indians led by Tecumseh captured Fort Detroit. The other American attacks failed when state militia troops refused to cross the Canadian border, arguing that they did not have to fight in a foreign country.
In 1813 the United States went on the attack again. A key goal was to break Britain's control of Lake Erie. The navy gave the task to Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry. After building a small fleet, Perry sailed out to meet the British on September 10, beginning the Battle of Lake Erie. The battle ended when the British surrendered. Perry sent a
message to General William Henry Harrison: "We have met the enemy and they are ours." Perry's brilliant victory forced the British to withdraw, giving the U.S. Army control of the lake and new hope.
With American control of Lake Erie established, General Harrison marched his army into Canada. At the Battle of the Thames River in October 1813, he defeated a combined force of British troops and Native Americans. Harrison's victory ended British power in the Northwest. Tecumseh's death during the fighting also dealt a blow to the British alliance with Native Americans in the region.
THE JEFFERSON ERA 285
THE IMPACT
TODAY
One witness to the shelling was a lawyer named Francis Scott
Key. He was so inspired by what he witnessed and the Americans' refusal to surrender that he wrote the poem that would become the song "The Star-Spangled Banner." The phrases "rockets' red glare" and "bombs bursting in air" describe the intense shelling the fort endured. The bombing was so heavy that it was heard in Philadelphia, 90 miles away. The song became the U.S. national anthem in 1931.
The Creek War
Meanwhile, war with American Indians erupted in the South. Creek Indians, angry at American settlers for pushing into their lands, took up arms in 1813. A large force attacked Fort Mims on the Alabama River, destroying the fort and killing close to 250 of its defenders. In response, the commander of the Tennessee militia, Andrew Jackson, gathered about 2,000 volunteers to move against the Creek nation.
In the spring of 1814 Jackson attacked the Creek along the Tallapoosa River in Alabama. Jackson's troops won this battle, the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. The Treaty of Fort Jackson, signed late in 1814, ended the Creek War and forced the Creek to give up millions of acres of their land.
Comparing What advan-
tages did Great Britain and the United States have atthe start of the war?
READING CHECK .
Britain on the Offensive
Despite U.S. success on the western and southern frontiers, the situation in the East grew
worse. After defeating France in April 1814, the British sent more troops to America.
British Attacks in the East
Now reinforced, the British attacked Washington, D.C. President Madison was forced to flee when the British broke through U.S. defenses. The British set fire to the White House, the Capitol, and other government buildings.
The British sailed on to Baltimore, Maryland, which was guarded by Fort McHenry. They shelled the fort for 25 hours. The Americans refused to surrender Fort McHenry. The British chose to retreat instead of continuing to fight.
The Battle of New Orleans
After the attack on Washington, the British moved against New Orleans. British commanders hoped to capture the city and thus take control of the Mississippi River.
Andrew Jackson commanded the U.S. forces around New Orleans. His troops were a mix of regular soldiers, including two battalions of free African Americans, a group of Choctaw Indians, state militia, and pirates led by Jean Lafitte.
The battle began on the morning of January 8, 1815. Some 5,300 British troops attacked Jackson's force of about 4,500. The British began marching toward the U.S. defenses, but they were caught on an open field. The British were cut down with frightening speed. More than 2,000 British soldiers were killed or wounded. The Americans, for their part, had suffered about 70 casualties. The Battle of New Orleans made Andrew Jackson a hero and was the last major conflict of the War of 1812.
Finding Main Ideas
What happened atthe Battle of New Orleans?
Effects of the War
Before the battle of New Orleans, a group of New England Federalists gathered secretly
READING CHECK ,
Analyzing the War of 1812


-	• Impressment of American sailors
* Interference with American shipping of the »»” • British military aid to Native Americans
^fleets of the |/yar
I

A
Increased sense of national pride American manufacturing boosted Native American resistance weakened
|F
at Hartford, Connecticut. At the Hartford Convention, Federalists agreed to oppose the war and send delegates to meet with Congress. Before the delegates reached Washington, however, news arrived that the war had ended. Some critics now laughed at the Federalists, and the party lost much of its political power.
Slow communications at the time meant that neither the Federalists nor Jackson knew about the Treaty of Ghent. The treaty, which had been signed in Belgium on December 24, 1814, ended the War of 1812.
Though each nation returned the territory it had conquered, the fighting did have several consequences. The war produced feelings of patriotism in Americans for having stood up to the mighty British. Some even called it the second war for indepen-
dence. The war also broke the power of many Native American groups. During the war, American manufacturers produced more to replace goods that could not be imported. When the war ended and trade resumed, American manufacturing grew even more as the economy revived. Finally, people began to see that the federal government needed a national bank in order to finance wars and other emergencies.
Reading check ,
Analyzing Information
What were the main effects of the War of 1812?
I
Summary and Preview TheWarofi8i2 I showed Americans that the nation would survive. In the next chapter you will see how the United States continued to grow.
Academic
Vocabulary
consequences
the effects of a particular event or events
Section 4 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What losses did American forces face in the early battles of the War of 1812? What victories did they win?
b. Make Generalizations What role did American Indians play in the war?
2.	a. Describe What attacks did the British lead against American forces?
b. Evaluate What do you think were the two most important battles of the war? Why?
3.	a. Identify What was the purpose of the Hartford Convention? How did it affect the Federalists?
b.	Draw Conclusions What were the effects of the War of 1812 and how did the United States benefit?
c.	Explain What were the benefits of free trade for the U.S. economy?
Critical Thinking
4. Comparing and Contrasting Review your notes on the battle dates. Then compare and contrast the details of the major battles during the War of 1812 in a chart like this one.
Battle	Details (Winner, Location, Importance)
	
	
	

5. Organizing Your Ideas Reorder the items on your lists from least important to most important.
THE JEFFERSON ERA 287
History and Geography
America's

Growth

■\,^ _ / , T; >
BritishTerritory
In 1803 the United States made the biggest land purchase in its history—the Louisiana Purchase. With this purchase, the country stretched west all the way to the Rocky Mountains. In 1819 the United States acquired Florida from Spain, gaining even more new territory. By 1820, the young American republic had roughly doubled in size, as you can see on the map. Explorers, traders, and settlers began to pour into the new lands in search of wealth, land, and a place to call home.
I
I
Claimed by United States, ceded to Great Britain in 1818
America's Population, 1820:10.1 million
>1	
	77'
	
Ethnic Groups, 1820
White/European African American Native American Other

Religions, 1820
■	Protestant
■	Catholic
■	Jewish
■	Other




The Oregon Country Both the United States and Great Britain claimed the Oregon Country.

:p 1RO3	k'iV'	’
Ifex v-
| Louisiana Purchase, 1803
, r^pi Claimed by United States and i Great Britain, 1818
i Convention of 1818	'
| From Britain to United States, 1818 Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819 | | I From Spain to United States, 1819
150
300 Kilometers
L V
f
....lOiRR
gB..

e fiss>,	a
Early Traders Soon after Lewis and Clark explored the Louisiana Territory, American fur trappers and traders began setting up trading posts there. Many of these posts became towns later as settlers arrived.
iliLLti
Territory
Through the Gaps Settlers crossed the Appalachians through valleys called gaps. In time, roads were built through the gaps, making it easier for Americans to head west.
\NTIC
-.AN
- 40° N—
"Ji
Missouri
Territory
Arkansas
Territory
iife
■■■

The Mighty Mississippi The Mississippi River was | the great highway of the central United States. Americans P west of the Appalachians shipped farm goods and supplies up | and down the Mississippi and its major port, New Orleans.

Unorganized Territory
-k

(Florida)
V
\
geography!
SKILLS’ INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Movement In which main directions did the United States expand before 1820?
2.	Region Based on the map, why do you think the United States was interested in claiming the Oregon Country?
■
v • ••?
19
Social Studies Skills
Analysis
L* .
| Critical t Thinking
Civic
Participation
Study
Determining Historical Context
Define the Skill
A context is the circumstances under which something happens. Historical context includes values, beliefs, conditions, and practices that were common in the past. At times, some of these were quite different from what they are today. To truly understand a historical statement or event, you have to take its context into account. It is not right to judge what people in history did or said based on present-day values alone. To be fair, you must also consider the historical context of the statement or event.
Learn the Skill
To better understand something a historical figure said or wrote, use the following guidelines to determine the context of the statement. Each of these steps will help you understand the person's frame of reference, or the factors that influenced his or her view of the world.
1.	Identify the speaker or writer, the date, and the topic and main idea of the statement.
2.	Determine the speaker's or writer's attitude and point of view about the topic.
3.	Review what you know about beliefs, conditions, or practices related to the topic that were common at the time. Find out more about the times in which the statement was made.
4.	Decide how well the statement reflects the values, attitudes, and practices of people living at that time. Then, determine how well it reflects values, attitudes, and practices related to the topic today.
Applying these guidelines will give you a better understanding of statements made by the the press during the lead up to the War of 1812. An editor of a newspaper in 1809 discussed the impressment of American sailors by Britain with language designed to inflame people into supporting the war:
^We can have no natural sympathies for a government which has tyrannized over us in every shape—which has murdered, torn from their homes, and plundered our citizens, insulted our flag, our territory, and our independence—and trampled upon the laws of civilized nations/^
By modern standards, the language seems strong. But think about the times in which it was written. The United States had only recently won the Revolutionary War against Britain, and Britain had not followed all of the requirements of the Treaty of 1783. When its historical context is considered, the statement might seem less extreme.
Practice the Skill
Read the following statement made by Henry Clay in 1811. Then answer the questions to determine its context and better understand it.
** What are we to gain by war, has been emphatically asked? In reply, he would ask, what are we not to lose by peace?~commerce, character, a nation's best treasure, honor!
1.	What was Clay's opinion of war?
2.	How might Americans' recent experience in the Revolution have caused him to feel that way?
3.	What were some factors in his frame of reference?
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER
Chapter Review
Visual Summary
Use the visual summary below to help you review the main ideas of the chapter.
The Nation at War and Peace
1803
Marbury v. Madison gives the Supreme Court the power of judicial review.
1803
The United States doubles its size by making the Louisiana Purchase.
1807-09
Congress passes the Embargo and
Non-lntercour: Acts.
1814
Federalists hold the Hartford
Conventioi to protest the War of 1812.
1814
The Treaty of Ghent ends the War of 1812.
1815
Andrew Jackson wins the Battle of New Orleans.
1811
William Henry Harrison defeats Tecumseh's forces at the Battle of Tippecanoe.
1812
The War of 1812 begins between Great Britain and the United States.
Reviewing Vocabulary,
Terms, and People
Complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the correct term or person.
1.	The War of 1812 ended soon after the U.S.
victory over the British at the_______.
2.	After winning the election of 1800,____
became the third president of the United States.
3.	The power of the Supreme Court to declare acts of Congress unconstitutional is known as
4.	After U.S. neutrality was violated, the United
States issued an_________against trade with
foreign nations.
5.	In 1803 Congress approved the_________,
which added former French territory in the West to the United States.
Comprehension and
Critical Thinking
SECTION 1 (Pages 266-270)
6.	a. Recall What were the key issues in the election of 1800?
b.	Summarize What events led to the case Marbury v. Madison, what was the decision, and why was it significant?
c.	Analyze In what ways did Marbury v. Madison affect the power of the judicial branch? How did Congress and the president respond to the ruling?
d.	Evaluate Which of Jefferson's new policies do you think was most important? Why?
SECTION 2 (Pages 272-277)
7.	a. Describe Where was the Louisiana Purchase? What was the purpose of the Lewis and Clark expedition?
b.	Identify Identify Jefferson's foreign policy. How did the Louisiana Purchase reflect Jefferson's foreign policy?
c.	Draw Conclusions What are three ways in
which the United States benefited from the
Louisiana Purchase?
THE JEFFERSON ERA 291
d. Evaluate Do you think that Napoleon made a wise decision when he sold Louisiana to the United States? Explain your answer.
SECTION 3 (Pages 278-283)
8.	a. Identify What group led the call for war with Great Britain? What was Madison's foreign policy in response?
b.	Contrast What arguments were given in favor of war with Great Britain? What arguments were given against war with Britain?
c.	Elaborate In your opinion, why were the Embargo Act and the Non-Intercourse Act unsuccessful?
SECTION 4 (Pages 284-287)
9.	a. Identify What role did Andrew Jackson play in the War of 1812?
b.	Make Inferences Why did the British want to capture the cities of Washington and New Orleans?
c.	Generalize What economic changes did the War of 1812 cause in the United States?
d.	Predict In what ways might the U.S. victory over Great Britain in the war affect the status of the United States in the world?
e.	Region How did the new region of the West differ geographically and economically from the original 13 states? Analyze the causes and effects of these differences.
Reviewing Themes
10.	Geography Through what geographic regions did the Lewis and Clark expedition travel?
11.	Politics What impact did the Hartford Convention have on American politics?
Using the Internet
12. Activity: Journal Entry Prior to Lewis and Clark's expedition, some people thought that woolly mammoths and unicorns lived in the uncharted West. The Corps of Discovery set off to find out the truth about this uncharted land and to search for a Northwest Passage that would speed commerce and bring wealth to the young nation. Through your online textbook,
research and take the point of view of one of the explorers. Write a series of journal entries outlining the thoughts, feelings, discoveries, and events you experienced during the journey. Include drawings of what you might have seen.
W hmhsocialstudies.coml
Reading Skills
Making Generalizations Use the Reading Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
13.	Choose one idea from each section of the chapter and make a generalization about it.
Social Studies Skills
WCEHTUItY
Historical Context Use the Social Studies Skills taught in this chapter to answer the question below.
A rising nation, spread over a wide and fruitful land, traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry, engaged in commerce with nations who feel power and forget right, advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal eye...
—Thomas Jefferson, 1 st Inaugural Address, 1801
N..,,............................................. ........... ...
14.	Using the historical context of the quote, describe Jefferson's point of view on the United States. What frame of reference influenced Jefferson?
"’J'WriteSmart
15.	Writing Your Letter of Recommendation
You already have a main idea and an opinion statement for your letter: Thomas Jefferson deserves to be on the list of the top-ten American presidents. Now, look at all your information and pick out three or four points—actions or character traits—that you think are the most important. Write a sentence on each of those points to add to your letter. Put the sentences in order, from the least important to the most important. Finally, conclude with one or two sentences that sum up why you think Thomas Jefferson was such an important president.
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER
Texas Test Practice
DIRECTIONS:
Read each question and write the letter of the best response. 1	The Supreme Court’s decision in the 1803 case Marbury v. Madison is an example of
A checks and balances.
B reserved powers.
C delegated powers.
D dual sovereignty.
2	Most of the fighting in the War of 1812 took place
F in Europe.
G in Canada.
H in the United States.
J at sea.
3	Why did President Jefferson agree to buy Louisiana from France?
A
He wanted to learn more about the lands and peoples east of the Mississippi River. B
He believed that the United States would benefit from the purchase. C
He wanted to end the French threat in North America. D
He hoped to increase the president’s constitutional powers. 4	The United States went to war with Britain in 1812 for which of the following reasons?
F to strengthen the alliance between Britain and France
G to endanger the rights of U.S. ships on the high seas
H to allow British influence among Indian groups on the frontier
J to stop trade restrictions against American merchants
5	The Lewis and Clark expedition was significant because it
A introduced the United States to valuable raw materials such as coal.
B improved America’s knowledge of the West.
C led to U.S. settlement of the Southwest.
D opened trade between the United States and Native Americans in the West.
6	During the War of 1812, trade interruptions resulted in
F the repeal of the Embargo Act.
G a rise in unemployment.
H an increase in the production of cotton in the South.
J a boost to U.S. manufacturing.
7	Read the following passage from Thomas Jefferson’s inaugural address and use it to answer the question below.
“Though the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail, that will, to be rightful, must be reasonable... [T]he minority possess their equal rights, which equal laws must protect... Let us then, fellow citizens, unite with one heart and one mind ... We have been called by different names brethren of the same principle. We are all republicans; we are all federalists.”
—President Thomas Jefferson, Inaugural Address, 1801
Document-Based Question What did Jefferson mean in making this statement?
THE JEFFERSON ERA 293

lark


In 1804 Meriwether Lewis, William Clark, and the 33-man Corps of Discovery began an 8,000-mile journey across uncharted territory. Under orders from President Thomas Jefferson, the expedition mapped a route across the Louisiana Purchase to the Pacific Ocean. From St. Louis, Missouri, they traveled west up the Missouri River, then across the Rocky Mountains, and to the Pacific. They met Native American peoples and cataloged geography,
plants, and animals. Not only was their mission one of history's greatest explorations; it also secured an American claim to the Pacific Coast and helped inspire millions to migrate west.
Explore entries from Lewis's journal and other primary sources online. You can find a wealth of information, video clips, activities, and more at
7\ hmhsocialstudies.com
					
		"						es-< M’fcas; '*S?	««
...uiv muidii wuuiaii recognized the point of a high plain to our right which she informed us
was not very distant from the summer retreat of her nation on a river
beyond the mountains which runs to the west."
— Meriwether Lewis
"Lewis's Journal, Entry 1"
Read an excerpt from Meriwether Lewis's journal that details Sacagawea's assistance during the journey.
Underway on the Missouri
Watch the video to see how the Corps of Discovery sailed up the Missouri River to begin their expedition.
Making Friends Upriver
Watch the video to see which Native American
peoples the Corps met and traded with as they made their journey west.
The Shores of the Pacific
Watch the video to see how the4 Corps tried to adapt to a different climate and the new peoples that they met along the Pacific coast.


LFWIS ANDCLARK 293 MC2
Mil
'"J'WriteSmart
>cus on Writing
A
Character Sketch Nations, like people, have characters. For example, a nation might be described as peaceful or aggressive, prosperous or struggling. In this chapter you'll read about the United States as a new nation with a new identity, or character. Then you'll write a paragraph describing that character. United
States	1816
James Monroe is elected president.
