CHAPTER 9
World
1815
Napoleon returns to power in France but is defeated at the Battle of Waterloo.
-x	-	?'v	.
*sAr./ * ,, _	’sj^'^; '
1820	1823
The Missouri Compromise	The Monroe
allows Maine and Missouri	Doctrine is
to become states.	issued.
1824
John Quincy Adams is elected president.
V£x^;	„ - (	‘\ ( ’ '
r;v, ^,?.r >a;.. i .jtfl.i*i\...s 'i /.I
1821
Mexico and Peru gain their independence from Spain.
r Granger Collection, New York
1824
Liberia is founded by freed American slaves.
1829
The Ottoman Empire recognizes the independence of Greece.
295
Reading Social Studies
Economics	Geography
Politics
Society and Culture
Science and Technology
FOCUS on Themes This chapter is titled "A New National Identity" because it explains how the United States government established relations with European powers and how Americans developed a strong sense of national pride even as they struggled
with important state issues. You will learn about the Monroe Doctrine, the Missouri Compromise, the Cumberland Road project, and the rise of American music, literature, and public schools—events that changed the country's culture and politics.
Comparing and Contrasting
FOCUS on Reading Comparing and contrasting facts, ideas, or concepts is a good way to learn more about them. That's one reason historians use comparison and contrast to explain people and events in history.
Understanding Comparison and Contrast To compare is to look for likenesses, or similarities. To contrast is to look for differences. Sometimes writers point out similarities and differences. Other times you have to look for them yourself. You can use a diagram like this one to keep track of similarities and differences as you read.
Roads and Canals
Clues for Comparison-Contrast
Writers sometimes signal compari-' sons or contrasts with words like
these:
j Comparison—similarly, like, in the ; same way, too
Contrast—however, unlike, but, i although, in contrast
Sentences or paragraphs that contain separate information on a single topic may be comparing and contrasting ideas on the topic.
>6 CHAPTER 9
Key Teras and
You Try It!
The following passage is from the chapter you are getting ready to read. As you read the passage, think about living during the early to mid-1800s when there were few roads.
Tariffs and Sectionalism
Not everyone agreed with the plan, however. Most of the resistance was centered in the West and the South. These regions were more dependent on trade to acquire manufactured goods than the North was. The plan for a high tariff on imported manufactured goods resulted in higher prices for these goods. This increase in prices would be felt more in the West and the South, while benefiting the manufacturers in the North.
From Chapter 9, p.303

After you read the passage, answer the following questions.
1.	What ideas about tariffs are compared in this passage?
2.	What is one way in which the different sections' views of tariffs were similar? What is one way in which they were different?
3.	Draw a diagram like the one on the previous page to compare the views of the North, the South, and the West. How will your information be arranged?
4.	Why do you think the author organized this passage as a comparison and contrast?
5. What signal words and sentence structures help you compare and contrast information in this passage? If you aren't sure, ask your teacher or classmates. Use these signal words in class discussions to compare and contrast ideas in the chapter.
As you read Chapter 9, look for exam-j pies of text arranged as comparisons ' and contrasts.
Chapter 9
Section 1
Rush-Bagot Agreement (p. 298) Convention of 1818 (p. 298)
James Monroe (p. 299)
Adams-Onls Treaty (p. 299)
Simon Bolivar (p. 300)
Monroe Doctrine (p. 300)
Section 2
nationalism (p. 302)
American System (p. 302)
Henry Clay (p. 302)
Cumberland Road (p. 304)
Erie Canal (p. 304)
Era of Good Feelings (p. 305) sectionalism (p. 305)
Missouri Compromise (p. 305a)
John Quincy Adams (p. 305b) Section 3
Washington Irving (p. 309)
James Fenimore Cooper (p. 309) Hudson River school (p. 310)
Thomas Cole (p. 310)
George Caleb Bingham (p. 310)
Academic Vocabulary
Success in school is related to knowing academic vocabulary— the words that are frequently used in school assignments and discussions. In this chapter, you will learn the following academic words:
circumstances (p. 300)
incentive (p. 305)
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 297
TEKS 5A, 5E, 6E, 10B, HA, 22B

JRmiNniCwlI rvTWlyi
Policy
What You Will Learn...

i
1.	The United States and Great Britain settled their disputes over boundaries and control of waterways.
2.	The United States gained Florida in an agreement with Spain.
3.	With the Monroe Doctrine, the United States strengthened its relationship with Latin America.
If YOU were there...
You are a Spanish settler living in West Florida in 1820. Your family has lived in Florida for many years. Only a few years ago, people in Spanish Florida were furious when American soldiers occupied the town of Pensacola. Now you hear that Spain has signed a treaty with the United States—Florida is no longer Spanish territory but rather part of the United States.
How would you feel about living under a new government?

? The United States peacefully ; settled disputes with foreign > powers.

Key Terms and People
Rush-Bagot Agreement, p. 298 Convention of 1818, p. 298 James Monroe, p. 299 Adams-Onfs Treaty, p. 299 Simon Bolivar, p. 300 Monroe Doctrine, p. 300
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
The War of 1812 left the United States I stronger and more self-confident. The new nation had remained strong | against a great European power. The United States then turned to diplomacy as a way to settle international issues. L
hmhsocialstudies.com
W TAKING NOTES ! 1
a
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the foreign policy issues the United States faced j between 1817 and 1823.
i
Settling Disputes with Great Britain
The Treaty of Ghent had ended the War of 1812, yet there were issues left unresolved. The United States and British Canada both wanted to keep their navies and fishing rights on the Great Lakes. In the spring of 1817, the two sides compromised by establishing the Rush-Bagot Agreement, which limited naval power on the Great Lakes for both the United States and British Canada.
Another treaty with Britain gave the United States fishing rights off parts of the Newfoundland and Labrador coasts. This treaty, known as the Convention of 1818, also set the border between the United States and Canada at 49°N latitude as far west as the Rocky Mountains. Interest in the valuable fur trade in the Oregon Country was another issue resolved by this treaty. Both countries agreed to occupy the Pacific Northwest together, an agreement that would be tested in the years to come.
Reading Check
Summarizing What were the main disputes between the United States and Britain?
acquire from Spain in 1819?
by both the United States and Great Britain?
United States Gains Florida
The United States also had a dispute over its southern border with Spanish Florida. In 1818 Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, son of John and Abigail Adams, held talks with Spanish diplomat Luis de Onis about letting Americans settle in Florida. Meanwhile, President James Monroe, elected in 1816, had sent U.S. troops to secure the U.S.-Florida border. General Andrew Jackson led these soldiers.
At the same time, conflicts arose between the United States and the Seminole Indians of Florida. The Seminole often helped runaway slaves and sometimes raided U.S. settlements. In April 1818 Jackson's troops invaded Florida to capture Seminole raiders. This act began the First Seminole War. During the war Jackson took over most of Spain's
important military posts. Then he overthrew the governor of Florida. He carried out these acts against Spain without receiving direct orders from President Monroe. Jackson's actions upset Spanish leaders. Most Americans, however, supported Jackson.
Jackson's presence in Florida convinced Spanish leaders to negotiate. In 1819 the two countries signed the Adams-Oms Treaty, which settled all border disputes between Spain and the United States. Under this treaty, Spain gave East Florida to the United States. In return, the United States gave up its claims to what is now Texas. U.S. leaders also agreed to pay up to $5 million of U.S. citizens' claims against Spain.
READING CHECK .
THE IMPACT
TODAY
Florida was admitted as the 27th U.S. state in 1845 and is now home to about 19 million people.
Summarizing How were the disagreements between the United States and Spanish Florida settled?
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 299
Primary Source
HISTORIC DOCUMENT
The Monroe Doctrine
President James Monroe established the foundation for U.S. foreign policy in Latin America in the Monroe Doctrine of 1823.
In this phrase, Monroe warns European nations against trying to influence events in the Western Hemisphere.
Monroe notes here the difference between existing colonies and newly independent countries.
The occasion has been judged proper for asserting ... that the American continents... are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any European powers...
The political system of the allied powers is essentially different... from that of America. We ... declare that we should consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety ...
With the existing colonies... we have not interfered and shall not interfere. But with the governments who have declared their independence and maintained it, and whose independence we have ... acknowledged, we could not view any interposition1 for the purpose of oppressing them ... by any European power in any other light than as the manifestation2 of an unfriendly disposition3 toward the United States.
ANALYSIS
SKILL!
ANALYZING PRIMARY SOURCES
1.	What warning did President Monroe give to European powers in the Monroe Doctrine?
2.	How does Monroe say the United States will treat existing European colonies?
1	interposition: interference
2	manifestation: evidence
3	disposition: attitude
Academic
Vocabulary
circumstances
surrounding
situation
Monroe Doctrine
Meanwhile, Spain had other problems. By the early 1820s most of the Spanish colonies in the Americas had declared independence. Revolutionary fighter Simon Bolivar, called the Liberator, led many of these struggles for independence. The political circumstances surrounding the revolutions reminded most American leaders of the American Revolution. As a result, they supported these struggles.
After Mexico broke free from Spain in 1821, President Monroe grew worried. He feared that rival European powers might try to take control of newly independent Latin American countries. He was also concerned about Russia's interest in the northwest coast of North America.
Secretary of State Adams shared President Monroe's concerns. In a Fourth of July speech before Congress, Adams said that the
United States had always been friendly with European powers, and that the country did not want to be involved in wars with them. He implied that he supported the newly independent countries but said the United States would not fight their battles.
Great Britain was also interested in restraining the influence of other European nations in the Americas. This was because Britain had formed close trading ties with most of the independent Latin American countries. Britain wanted to issue a joint statement with the United States to warn the rest of Europe not to interfere in Latin America.
Instead, Secretary of State Adams and President Monroe decided to put together a document protecting American interests. The Monroe Doctrine was an exclusive statement of American policy warning European powers not to interfere with the Americas.
0 CHAPTER 9
The doctrine was issued by the president on December 2, 1823, during his annual message to Congress.
The Monroe Doctrine had four basic points.
1.	The United States would not interfere in the affairs of European nations.
2.	The United States would recognize, and not interfere with, European colonies that already existed in North and South America.
3.	The Western Hemisphere was to be off-limits to future colonization by any foreign power.
4.	The United States would consider any European power's attempt to colonize or interfere with nations in the Western Hemisphere to be a hostile act.
Some Europeans strongly criticized the Monroe Doctrine, but few European countries challenged it. One impact of the doctrine was to bring Latin America under the economic, political, and military influ-
ence of the United States. It also kept most European powers from interfering in Latin American affairs. The doctrine has remained important to U.S. foreign policy. The United States has continued to consider Latin America within its sphere of influence—the area a nation claims some control over. At times, it has intervened in Latin American affairs when its own interests, such as national security, were at risk.
Analyzing What effect did
the revolutions in Latin America have on U.S. foreign policy?
READING CHECK
■	Summary
■	you leam<
AND PREVIEW
In this section d that U.S. foreign policy was characterized by both compromise and strong leadership following the War of 1812. In the next section you will learn about the sense of national pride that developed as the United States grew and expanded. Section 1 Assessment
hmhsocialstudies.com .i j
Reviewing Ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Identify What issues were settled between the United States and Great
Britain in 1817 and 1818? Which areas did these decisions affect?
b.	Make Inferences Why would the United States and Britain agree to occupy the Pacific Northwest together?
c.	Elaborate Why were the Rush-Bagot Agreement and the Convention of 1818 compromises?
2.	a. Recall What problems existed between Spain and the United States?
b.	Analyze Why was the Adams-Onls Treaty
important? What area did it affect?
c.	Evaluate Do you think that Andrew Jackson was right to act without orders? Explain your answer.
3.	a. Explain What did the Monroe Doctrine state? Explain its impact.
b.	Contrast How did the Monroe Doctrine differ from Adams's Fourth of July Address?
c.	Elaborate What do you think the newly independent Latin American countries thought of the Monroe Doctrine?
Critical Thinking
4.	Identifying Cause and Effect Review your notes regarding U.S. foreign policy issues. Create a new chart and, for each issue, identify the nations involved, the agreement or doctrine, and the effects or impact.
Nations	Agreement/Doctrine	Issue	Effects/ Impact
			
5. Determining Relationships One ofthe main ways you can learn about someone's character is by how he or she treats others. Start a list of words and phrases that describe how the United States acted in relationships with other nations. For example, lists might include words and phrases like "willing to compromise" and "firm."
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 301
2
SECTION
TEKS 1A,5A,5B,5C,6A,7A,7D, 10B,11A,11B,12A,12D,13A,14B,
18A,18B,18C,21A,22B,27B
What You Will Learn...

1.	Growing nationalism led to improvements in the nation’s transportation systems.
2.	The Missouri Compromise settled an important regional conflict.
3.	The outcome of the election of 1824 led to controversy.
A rising sense of national unity allowed some regional differences to be set aside and national interests to be served.
Key Terms and People
nationalism, p. 302 American System, p. 302 Henry Clay, p. 302 Cumberland Road, p. 304 Erie Canal, p. 304 Era of Good Feelings, p. 305 sectionalism, p. 305 Missouri Compromise, p. 305a John Quincy Adams, p. 305b
hmhsocialstudies.com
Wtakinq NOTES	I
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on factors that contributed to national unity.

If YOU were there...
You live near the western end of the newly completed Erie Canal in 1831. In fact, your older brothers helped build the canal. Everyday you watch as mules pull the canal boats along the still water of the canal. Sometimes the boats carry passengers traveling from city to city. You have never been far from your home, and you are curious about their journey.
What would you ask the travelers?
BDING BACKGROUND
Peace, prosperity, and a growing country Americans a sense of national unity. In practical terms, building and canals also helped unify the nation. They made travel easier, linking people from different regions of the country. Nevertheless, some ' i regional conflicts continued.
Growing Nationalism
Pleased by successful negotiations with foreign powers, Americans enjoyed a rising sense of nationalism. Nationalism is feelings of pride in and loyalty to a nation. Americans believed in the nation's potential to build a society that was equal to European powers.
The American System
The Democratic-Republicans wanted to build a strong national economy to promote the sense of a unified country and reduce sectional conflicts. They pushed forward a plan eventually known as the American System —a series of measures intended to make the United States economically self-sufficient. The most vocal supporter of the plan was U.S. representative Henry Clay from Kentucky. To build the economy, Clay pushed for a national bank that would provide a single currency, making interstate trade easier. And the lessons learned in the War of 1812 led many to think that a national bank would stabilize the economy. Clay wanted the money from a protective tariff to be used to improve and build roads and canals.
>02 CHAPTER 9
Economics and Sectionalism
industry and favored policies that made imported goods more expensive than American-made goods.
These internal improvements would unite the country. They would provide a way for both goods and people to travel more easily across the long distances of the nation. Agricultural products of the West and the South and manufactured goods made in the North would be easier to transport to distant markets.
Not everyone agreed with the plan, however. Most of the resistance was centered in the West and the South. These regions were more dependent on trade to acquire manufactured goods than the North was. The plan for a high tariff on imported manufactured goods resulted in higher prices for these goods. This increase in prices would be felt more in the West and the South, while benefiting the manufacturers in the North. Clay responded with the argument that the North would be dependent on those regions for food and cotton. The South, however, still opposed the possibility of higher prices.
Respected Congressman Daniel Webster spoke against the tariff because he believed it would help one industry over others. Webster and his supporters argued that using a federal law that benefited one region of the nation more than others violated the ideals
Results
•	American-made goods were cheaper, leading to higher sales and great profits for U.S. businesses.
•	Iron and cotton would be used by U.S. businesses instead of foreign businesses.
•	American businesses would receive help in order to expand.
•	Trade within the nation would increase.
The West produced many food crops and favored policies that encouraged trade and lower prices on goods.
The South exported enormous amounts of cotton and favored policies that allowed them to trade with European textile manufacturers.
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 303
of the Constitution. They also believed that it put too much control of the nation in the hands of the central government and acted against the principles of a free-market economy. Some members of Congress believed that the Constitution did not permit the federal government to spend money on internal improvements. Clay argued that the possible gains for the country justified federal action.
Roads and Canals
In the early 1800s most roads in the United States were made of dirt, making travel difficult. British actress Frances Kemble described one New York road she had struggled along during a visit in the 1830s.
^The wickedest road, I do think, the cruellest, hard-heartedest road, that ever [a] wheel rumbled upon/,
—Frances Anne (Kemble) Butler, Journal
To improve the nation's roads, Congress agreed with Clay and invested in road building. The Cumberland Road was the first road built by the federal government.
It ran from Cumberland, Maryland, to Wheeling, a town on the Ohio River in present-day West Virginia. Construction began in 1815. Workers had to cut a 66-foot-wide band, sometimes through forest, to make way for the road. Then they had to use shovels and pickaxes to dig a 12- to 18-inch roadbed, which they filled with crushed stone. All of the work had to be done without the benefit of today's bulldozers and steamrollers.
By 1818 the road reached Wheeling. By 1833 the National Road, as the expansion was called, stretched to Columbus, Ohio. By 1850 it reached all the way to Illinois.
Meanwhile, Americans tried to make water transportation easier by building canals. One of the largest projects was the Erie Canal, which ran from Albany to Buffalo, New York.
Construction of the canal began in 1817 and was completed in 1825. Using shovels, British, German, and Irish immigrants dug the entire canal by hand. The canal cost millions of dollars, but it proved
to be worth the expense. The Erie Canal allowed goods and people to move between towns on Lake Erie and New York City and the East Coast. Its success served as an incentive for a canal-building boom across the country.
The construction of canals and roads had direct and indirect effects on the environment. The landscape was changed by the clearing of forests, and rivers and streams were redirected or dammed. Once the canals and roads were built, new farms and towns developed and further changed the environment. Even in rural areas, the natural environment was changed to accommodate the needs of humans.
Era of Good Feelings
From 1815 to 1825 the United States enjoyed the Era of Good Feelings, a time of peace, pride, and progress. The phrase was coined by a Boston editor in 1817 during James Monroe's visit to New England early in his presidency.
The emphasis on national unity was strengthened by two Supreme Court case decisions that reinforced the power of the federal government. In the 1819 case McCulloch v. Maryland, the Court asserted the implied powers of Congress in allowing for the creation of a national bank. In the 1824 case Gibbons v. Ogden, the Court said that the states could not interfere with the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce.
Both of these court cases, along with others, showed the increasing control of the national government over the decisions of state governments. Congress began to make more laws based on the loose interpretation of the necessary and proper clause. The system of federalism that was framed by the Constitution was still debated, however, and many people disagreed with the growing power of the central government.
READING CHECK
Drawing Inferences How did
new roads and canals affect the economy?
The Issue of Sectionalism
Even as many Americans felt a growing national pride, tensions between the three geographic regions of the nation began to grow. The three regions—the West, the North, and the South—had different economies, political goals, and social customs. Disagreements between the different regions, or sectionalism, were a common part of the political debates of the era of the early to mid-1800s.
When the nation was founded, the main political divisions between states followed the regional lines between those in the North and those in the South. From the beginning, the two regions had different economic and political concerns. The North worked for laws supporting trade and commerce, while the South favored policies that benefited agricultural production. Northern states insisted on equal representation for states with lower populations to make sure they were not overpowered by the more populous southern states. But the biggest difference between the regions was the southern system of slavery. From the beginning of the nation, leaders in the two regions debated how to handle the difference.
Under the Articles of Confederation, the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 had established a new kind of political region in the country. Territories were not states, but they were under the direct administration of the federal government. The ordinances established the policies and political structures for new land acquired in the future. As Americans settled the regions, new states were created. Their economies and political goals, however, were different than those of the northern and southern states along the Atlantic coast.
Slavery and Expansion
The most heated debates about sectionalism were often linked with slavery. Leaders in the southern states knew that many in the North wanted the practice to be abolished. They knew that if enough votes from free states
Academic
Vocabulary
incentive
something that leads people to follow a certain course of action
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 305
The Missouri Compromise, 1820
MA
UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY
(FLORIDA)
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS) INTERPRETING MAPS
J
The Missouri Compromise ] banned slavery in the J region north of 36°30'N. I
Free state 1 1 Free territory I
Slave state 1 1 Slave territory Known as the silver-tongued Kentuckian, Henry Clay was a gifted speaker. He became involved in local politics early in his life, and by age 29 he was appointed to the U.S. Senate. Throughout his career in the Senate, he was dedicated to preserving the Union. The Missouri Compromise and a later agreement, the Compromise of 1850, helped to ease sectional tensions, at least temporarily.
Analyzing Why did Henry Clay work for compromises between regions?
could be gained in Congress, slavery would be ended. Leaders in free states, however, knew that if the South gained more votes in the Senate, policies that favored the slave states would be passed. For this reason, Congress worked to maintain an equal number of free and slave states in the Union.
Missouri Compromise
As new states were added, leaders argued over whether or not slavery should spread into new states. One such disagreement arose in 1819 when Congress considered Missouri's application to enter the Union as a slave state. At the time, the Union had 11 free states and 11 slave states. Adding a new slave state would have tipped the balance in the Senate in favor of the South.
1.	Region In which part of the country was slavery permitted?
2.	Human-Environment Interaction Why did leaders choose 36° 30' as the compromise line?
To protect the power of the free states, the House passed a special amendment. It declared that the United States would accept Missouri as a slave state, but importing enslaved Africans into Missouri would be illegal. It also set free the children of Missouri slaves. Southern politicians angrily opposed this plan.
North Carolina senator Nathaniel Macon wanted to continue adding slave states. "Why depart from the good old way, which has kept us in quiet, peace, and harmony?" he asked. Eventually, the Senate rejected the amendment. Missouri was still not a state.
Henry Clay convinced Congress to agree to the Missouri Compromise, which settled the conflict that had arisen from Missouri's application for statehood. This compromise had three main conditions:
1.	Missouri would enter the Union as a slave state.
2.	Maine would join the Union as a free state, keeping the number of slave and free states equal.
3.	Slavery would be prohibited in any new territories or states north of 36°30' latitude—Missouri's southern border.
105a CHAPTER 9
Congress passed the Missouri Compromise in 1820. Despite the success of the compromise, there were still strong disagreements between the North and South over the expansion of slavery. Although people hoped that the compromise would end the debate, the issue would continue to arise with each new application for statehood.
Drawing Conclusions Why
did Henry Clay propose the Missouri Compromise to resolve the issue of Missouri statehood?
Reading Check ,
The Election of 1824
Soon, a presidential election also brought controversy. Andrew Jackson won the most popular votes in 1824, although he did not win a majority. However, he did not have enough electoral votes to win office. Under the Constitution, the House of Representatives
had to choose the winner. When the House chose John Quincy Adams as president, Jackson's supporters claimed that Adams had made a corrupt bargain with Speaker of the House Henry Clay in order to be named president. These accusations grew after Adams chose Clay to be secretary of state. The controversy weakened Adams's support and encouraged more political action by Jackson's supporters in the Democratic Party.
READING CHECK
Focus ON Reading
Compare and contrast opinions about John
Quincy Adams.
Drawing Inferences Why
did Adams have weak support during his presidency?
I
Summary and Preview strong nation-I alistic feeling contributed to the develop- ment of America's politics and economy. In the next section you will read about the development of a new national culture.
Section 2 Assessment
:	hmhsocialstudies.com
Reviewing ideas, Terms, and People
1.	a. Define What was the Era of Good Feelings?
b.	Describe What positions did Henry Clay and Daniel Webster take in the Congressional debates on the American System?
c.	Explain How did the War of 1812 affect the U.S. economy?
d.	Analyze Explain the issues behind the decisions and the importance of the Supreme Court cases McCulloch v. Maryland and Gibbons v. Ogden. How did they affect life in the United States?
e.	Predict How would transportation improvements eventually aid the growth and stability of the U.S. economy?
2.	a. Recall What role did Henry Clay play in the debate over Missouri's statehood?
b.	Explain What problem did Missouri's request for statehood cause?
c.	Elaborate Was the Missouri Compromise a
good solution to the debate between free states and slave states? Explain your answer.
3.	a. Identify Who were the candidates in the presidential election of 1824? How was the winner determined?
b. Draw Conclusions Why did John Quincy Adams lose popular support following the election of 1824?
Critical Thinking
4.	Evaluating Review your notes on nationalism during the Era of Good Feelings. Then copy the following graphic organizer and use it to identify how threats to nationalism were resolved by the Missouri Compromise.
Sectional “Z differences
Missouri
Compromise
Outcome
1.
2.
3.
sq>n Writing
"’J'WriteSmart
5. Judging Self-Esteem Another way you can tell about people's characters is by how they view themselves. Are they self-confident? Do they make healthy choices? Think of the United States as a person and jot down notes about the view the United States had of itself. Is the new nation pleased with itself? Does it feel confident or confused?
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 305b
History and Geography
In 1825 New York opened the Erie Canal which connected Buffalo on Lake Erie to Albany on the Hudson River. With the new canal boats and barges could travel from New York Harbor in the east to the Great Lakes region in the west. Trade boomed, new cities formed, and settlers moved farther west as the Erie Canal helped open up the Midwest region to farming and settlement.
363 miles
Erie Canal
Hudsj^River
jSuUbany /



r
W	wU*, it


Buffalo
370 feet
From this elevation profile you can tell that the canal rises almost 600 feet as it winds its way westward from Albany to Buffalo. Barges move along a steep route through a series of locks along the canal. The diagram below shows you how locks work.
Albany


Tow path x |—-i-
Lock


, Main gate
O
The barge enters the lock through the main gate. © Water flows into the lock through the sluice gate to raise the boat to the next level.
© The barge leaves the lock as mules help pull it across the water.
06 CHAPTER 9
Lake Superior
Albany
Later canals extended west into Ohio and Indiana.
Chicago
SB'
Agricultural Pr0
Trade through New York Harbor boomed as goods flowed along the Erie Canal to overseas markets and back to settlers and cities in the West.
■jsiii
3
EFFECTS OF THE CANAL
Thanks to the canal, the cost of shipping dropped. Lower costs led to increases in shipping and in city populations.
Cost of Shipping
<1
Population
1825: $10 per ton by canal
Year
ATLANTIC OCEAN
W-
GEOGRAPHY
SKILLS) INTERPRETING MAPS
1.	Region How did the Erie Canal affect western lands?
2.	Location What effect do you think the Erie Canal had on New York City?
A NEW NATIONAL IDENTITY 307
wUvwVYw
1.	American writers created a new style of literature.
2.	A new style of art showcased the beauty of America and its people.
3.	American ideals influenced other aspects of culture, including religion and music.
4.	Architecture and education were affected by cultural ideals.
If YOU were there...
You live in Philadelphia in 1830. Though you've lived in the city all your life, you dream about the West and the frontier. Now you've discovered a wonderful writer whose stories tell about frontier life and events. You can't wait to read his next exciting adventure. You think that perhaps someday you could be a frontier hero, too.
Why would the frontier seem so exciting?

As the United States grew, developments in many cultural areas contributed to the creation of a new American identity.
I BUILDING BACKGROUND
Until the early 1800s, Americans took ■ most of their cultural ideas from Great Britain and Europe. But as w American politics and the economy developed, so too did a new national culture. Writers and artists were inspired by American history and the American landscape.
American Writers
Key Terms and People
Washington Irving, p. 309 James Fenimore Cooper, p. 309 Hudson River school, p. 310 Thomas Cole, p. 310 George Caleb Bingham, p. 310
hmhsocialstudies.com
I TAKING NOTES I
Use the graphic organizer online to take notes on the new developments in American culture in the 1820s and 1830s.
Like many people the world over, Americans expressed their thoughts and feelings in literature and art and sought spiritual comfort in religion and music. Developments in education and architecture also reflected the growing national identity. The arts became a way to show the similarities among Americans as well as the differences between American and European life. To do this, writers and artists used themes and images that were familiar to most Americans.

CHAPTER 9
One of the first American writers to gain international fame was Washington Irving. Born in 1783, he was named after George Washington. Irving's works often told about American history. Through a humorous form of writing called satire, Irving warned that Americans should learn from the past and be cautious about the future.
Irving shared this idea in one of his best-known short stories, "Rip Van Winkle." This story describes a man who falls asleep during the time of the American Revolution. He wakes up 20 years later to a society he does not recognize. Irving published this and another well-known tale, "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," in an 1819-20 collection.
In some of his most popular works, Irving combined European influences with American settings and characters. His work served as a bridge between European literary traditions and a new type of writer who focused on American characters and society.
Perhaps the best known of these new writers was James Fenimore Cooper. Cooper was born to a wealthy New Jersey family in 1789. Stories about the West and the Native Americans who lived on the frontier fascinated him. These subjects became the focus of his best-known works.
Cooper's first book was not very successful, but his next novel, The Spy, was a huge success. Published in 1821, itwas an adventure story set during the American Revolution. It appealed to American readers' patriotism and desire for an exciting, action-filled story.
In 1823 Cooper published The Pioneers, the first of five novels featuring the hero Natty Bumppo. Cooper's novels told of settling the western frontier and included historical events. For example, his novel The Last of the Mohicans takes place during the French and Indian War. By placing fictional characters in a real historical setting, Cooper popularized a type of writing called historical fiction.
Some critics said that Cooper's characters were not interesting. They particularly criticized the women in his stories; one writer labeled them "flat as a prairie." Other authors of historical fiction, such as Catharine Maria Sedgwick, wrote about interesting heroines. Sedgwick's characters were inspired by the people of the Berkshire Hills region of Massachusetts, where she lived. Her works include A New-England Tale and Hope Leslie.
Analyzing How did Ameri-
can writers such as Irving and Cooper help create a new cultural identity in the United States?
A
New Style of Art The writings of Irving and Cooper inspired painters. These artists began to paint landscapes that showed the history of America and the beauty of the land. Earlier American painters had mainly painted portraits. By the 1830s the Hudson River school had emerged.
READING CHECK .
309
The artists of the Hudson River school created paintings that reflected national pride and an appreciation of the American landscape. They took their name from the subject of many of their paintings—the Hudson River valley.
Landscape painter Thomas Cole was a founder of the Hudson River school. He had moved to the United States from Britain in 1819. He soon recognized the unique qualities of the American landscape. As his work gained fame, he encouraged other American artists to show the beauty of nature. "To walk with nature as a poet is the necessary condition of a perfect artist," Cole once said.
Artists also began studying and painting the birds, animals, and plants of the United States. One wildlife painter, John James Audubon, became famous in both America and England for his paintings of birds. He traveled throughout the West, as far as Yellowstone, collecting images and descriptions of American wildlife.
By the 1840s the style of American painting was changing. More artists were trying to combine images of the American landscape with scenes from people's daily lives. Painters like George Caleb Bingham and Alfred Jacob Miller travelled west to paint scenes of the American frontier, including trappers, traders, settlers, and Native Americans.
Religion and Music
Through the early and mid-1800s, several waves of religious revivalism swept the United States. During periods of revivalism, meetings were held for the purpose of reawakening religious faith. These meetings sometimes lasted for days and included large sing-alongs.
At many revival meetings people sang songs called spirituals. Spirituals are a type of folk hymn found in both white and African American folk-music traditions. This type of song developed from the practice of calling out text from the Bible. A leader would call out the text one line at a time, and the congregation would sing the words using a familiar tune. Each singer added his or her own style to the tune. The congregation of singers sang freely as inspiration led them.
While spirituals reflected the religious nature of some Americans, popular folk music of the period reflected the unique views of the growing nation in a different way. One of the most popular songs of the era was "Hunters of Kentucky," which celebrated the Battle of New Orleans. It became an anthem for the spirit of nationalism in the United States and was used successfully in Andrew Jackson's campaign for the presidency in 1828.
READING CHECK
READING CHECK ,
Finding Main Ideas How
did the style of American art change to reflect the American way of life in the early 1800s?
Summarizing How did music reflect American interests in the early to mid-1800s?
Painters of the Hudson River school prove American landscapes are worthy of art. (Thomas Cole's
The Oxbow, 1836)
CHAPTER 9
Noah Webster publishes his first dictionary of American— not British—
English
Architecture and Education
American creativity extended to the way in which people designed buildings. Before the American Revolution, most architects followed the style used in Great Britain. After the Revolution, leaders such as Thomas Jefferson called for Americans to model their architecture after the styles used in ancient Greece and Rome. Many Americans admired the ancient civilization of Greece and the Roman Republic because they contained some of the same democratic and republican ideals as the new American nation did.
As time went by, more architects followed Jefferson's ideas. Growing American cities soon had distinctive new buildings designed in the Greek and Roman styles. These buildings were usually made of marble or other stone and featured large, stately columns.
Americans also embraced educational progress. Several early American political leaders expressed a belief that democracy would only succeed in a country of educated and enlightened people. But there was no general agreement on who should provide that education.
Eventually, the idea of a state-funded public school gathered support. In 1837 Massachusetts lawmakers created a state board of education. Other states followed this example, and the number of public schools slowly grew.
READING CHECK .
Identifying Points of View
Why did some Americans call for new architectural styles and more education after the American Revolution?
I
