Chapter 11
Political Developments in the Early Republic
How did the Federalist and Republican visions for the United States differ?
11.1	Introduction
The illustration to the left shows four leaders in the first government formed under the Constitution. On the far right stands former Continental army general George Washington, who had been lured out of retirement to serve as the nation’s first president. Seldom has a leader seemed more reluctant to take power. “My movements to the chair of government,” he wrote on leaving home, “will be accompanied by feelings not unlike those of a culprit [criminal] who is going to the place of his execution.”
Henry Knox sits opposite Washington. During the American Revolution, this Boston bookseller became a general and Washington’s close friend and adviser. When Washington became president in 1789, he made Knox his secretary of war.
Take a close look at the other two men portrayed here. Alexander Hamilton, who stands beside the president, served as Washington’s secretary of the treasury. Thomas Jefferson, who stands behind Knox, served as secretary of state. It was his job to manage relations between the United States and other countries.
Washington chose Hamilton and Jefferson for these positions because of all they had in common. Both were strong patriots. Both had served their country during the war—Hamilton in the Continental army and Jefferson in the Continental Congress. Both had brilliant minds.
But for all they had in common, the two men were opposites in many ways. Hamilton dressed with great care. Jefferson was sloppy with clothes. Hamilton moved with precision. Jefferson slouched. Hamilton was a doer who moved briskly from task to task. Jefferson was a thinker who took time to explore ideas.
As you will discover, Hamilton and Jefferson soon became political rivals. Their rivalry eventually gave rise to the nation s first political parties, which had different visions for the new nation.
Thomas Jefferson (above) and Alexander Hamilton (below) led the first political parties of the new nation.
◄ George Washington, atthe far right, meets with his close advisers.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 205
!
11.2	Launching the New Government
On April 30, 1789, George Washington took the oath of office as the first president of the United States. After his inauguration, Washington addressed both houses of Congress. He asked Congress to work with him to put into place “the wise measures on which the success of this government must depend.” At times, his hands shook so much that he had trouble reading his speech.
I
Martha Washington, on the left, held tea parties on Friday evenings atthe presidential mansion in New York City. Atthese parties, people could discuss important issues with President Washington, shown nearthe center.
The Debate over Washington's Title Washington had reason to be nervous. The first Congress was deeply divided. Some members were eager to build a strong national government. Others were just as eager to limit the power of the new government. These differences showed up immediately in a debate over what title to use when addressing the president.
Vice President John Adams pointed out that European heads of government had titles like “Your Excellency” that showed respect for their office. The president, he argued, should have a similar title. Supporters of a strong national government agreed.
Others argued that such titles smelled of royalty and had no place in a democracy. A few members of Congress joked that the rather plump Adams should be given the title “His Rotundity” (His Roundness). The debate finally ended when Washington let it be known that he preferred the simple title “Mr. President.”
Setting Up the Executive Branch Next, Congress turned to the task of creating executive departments. As Washington had feared, arguments broke out at once over what those departments should be and what powers they should have.

Congress eventually approved three departments. The Department of State was set up to handle relations with other countries. The Department of War was established to defend the nation. The Treasury Department was set up to oversee the nation’s finances. Congress also created an attorney general to serve as the president’s legal adviser and a postmaster general to head the postal system.
Washington chose men he trusted such as Thomas Jefferson, Alexander
Hamilton, and Henry Knox-to fill these positions. He often met with them to ask for their ideas and advice. The heads of the executive departments came to be known as the presidents cabinet.
Chapter 11
11.3	Washington as President
The most critical problem facing the new government was a lack of funds. The national treasury was empty. Congress had the power to raise funds through taxes. But its members argued endlessly about what to tax and by how much. In 1791, Congress finally agreed to place an excise tax on whiskey and other luxury goods, such as carriages. An excise tax is a tax on the production or sale of a product.
The Whiskey Rebellion
Settlers living west of the Appalachian Mountains reacted angrily to the tax. Western farmers found it too costly to transport their grain across the mountains to sell in eastern cities.
Instead, they distilled their bulky wheat into whiskey, which could be shipped more cheaply. Many farmers complained that the tax made their whiskey too expensive, and they refused to pay it.
To end these protests, Congress lowered the excise tax in 1793. Most farmers began to pay up, but not the tax rebels of western Pennsylvania.
In 1794, these “Whiskey Boys” tarred and feathered tax collectors who tried to enforce the law.
Alexander Hamilton and George Washington saw the Whiskey Rebellion as a threat to the authority of the national government. At Hamilton’s urging, Washington led 13,000 state militia troops across the mountains to crush the rebels. Faced with overwhelming force, the rebellion ended.
Thomas Jefferson thought that the idea of sending an army to catch a few tax rebels was foolish. Even worse, he believed, was that Hamilton was prepared to violate people’s liberties by using armed force to put down opposition to government policies.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
Whiskey Rebellion a revolt by farmers in 1794 against an excise tax on whiskey
The Whiskey Rebellion challenged the new nation's ability to enforce its laws. When several hundred farmers refused to pay a federal whiskey tax, President Washington personally led 13,000 state militia troops to put down the rebellion.
The French Revolution Meanwhile, the nation was caught up in a debate over events in France. In 1789, the French people rebelled against their king. The leaders of the French Revolution dreamed of building a nation based on “liberty, equality, and fraternity [brotherhood].” Three years later, France became a republic and declared a war of all peoples against all kings.”
Many Americans were thrilled by the French Revolution. This was especially true of Jefferson and his followers, who began calling themselves Democratic-Republicans, or simply Republicans. The Republicans saw the French Revolution as part of a great crusade for democracy.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 207
The Granger Collection, NewYork
In time, news from France caused supporters of the revolution to change their opinion. Cheered on by angry mobs, France’s revolutionary government began beheading wealthy nobles. Some 20,000 men, women, and children were killed.
Hamilton and his followers, who called themselves Federalists, were appalled by the bloodshed. Many Federalists were themselves wealthy. After hearing about the fate of wealthy families in France, they began to fear for their own safety, wondering whether such terrors could happen in the United States. “Behold France,” warned one Federalist, “an open hell... in which we see... perhaps our own future.”
Washington's Farewell Address The
growing division between Republicans and Federalists so disturbed Washington that he agreed to run for a second term as president in 1792. He was the only person, Hamilton and Jefferson told him, who could keep the nation together.
Near the end of his second term, Washington announced that he would not run again. Before leaving office, the president prepared a message that became known as Washington's Farewell Address. In it, he reminded Americans of all that bound them together as a people. “With slight
shades of difference,” he said, “you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together.”
Next, Washington warned of two threats to the nation’s future. One of those threats was problems the nation was having with other countries. The other threat was the “spirit of party.” It was natural for people to hold different opinions, Washington said. But he warned against the dangers of passionate loyalty to parties. If fighting between parties was not controlled, it could tear the young nation apart.
Despite his worries for the future, Washington had much to be proud of as he left office. The new government was up and running. The nation was growing so fast that it had added three new states: Kentucky, Tennessee, and Vermont. Most of all, Washington had steered his government safely through quarrelsome times. He left the nation united and at peace.
When the French Revolution turned violent and thousands of nobles were beheaded on the guillotine, many Americans withdrew their support for the revolution.
Washington's Farewell Address George Washington’s parting message to the nation, given in 1796, in which he warned of threats to the nation’s future
108 Chapter 11
11.4	Alexander Hamilton and the Federalist Party
George Washington’s warnings did not stop the rise of political parties in the young nation. The Federalist Party appeared first during the debates over the ratification of the Constitution. Its most influential leader was Washington’s energetic treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton.
Personal Background Hamilton was born in the West Indies and raised on the Caribbean island of St. Croix. When Hamilton was 13, a devastating hurricane struck the island. Hamilton wrote a vivid description of the storm that impressed all who read it. A few St. Croix leaders arranged to send the talented teenager to New York, where he could get the education he deserved. Once in America, Hamilton never looked back.
Hamilton’s blue eyes were said to turn black when he was angry. But most of the time they sparkled with intelligence and energy. With no money or family connections to help him rise in the world, he made his way on ability, ambition, and charm.
George Washington spotted Hamilton’s talents early in the American Revolution.
Washington made the young man his aide-de-camp, or personal assistant. Near the end of the war, Hamilton improved his fortunes by marrying Elizabeth Schuyler, who came from one of New York’s richest and most powerful families. With her family’s political backing, Hamilton was elected to represent New York in Congress after the war. Later, he served as a delegate from New York to the Constitutional Convention.
View of Human Nature Hamilton’s view of human nature was shaped by his wartime experiences. All too often, he had seen people put their own interests and desire for personal profit above the cause of patriotism and the needs of the country.
“Every man ought to be supposed a knave [scoundrel],” he concluded, “and to have no other end [goal] in all his actions, but private interest”
Most Federalists shared Hamilton’s view that people were basically selfish and out for themselves. For this reason, they distrusted any system of government that gave too much power to “the mob,” or the common people.
Such a system, said Hamilton, could only lead to “error, confusion, and instability.
American artist John Trumbull painted this portrait of Alexander Hamilton. Hamilton rose from poverty to lead the Federalist Party. His brilliant career was cut short when he was killed in a duel with Vice President Aaron Burr, whom he had accused of being a traitor.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 209
Views on Government Federalists believed that the best people” —educated, wealthy, public-spirited men like themselves—should run the country. Such people, they believed, had the time, education, and background to run the country wisely. They could also be trusted to make decisions for the general good, not just for themselves. Those who own the country,” said Federalist John Jay bluntly, “ought to govern it.”
Federalists favored a strong national government. They hoped to use the new government’s powers under the Constitution to unite the quarreling states and keep order among the people. In their view, the rights of states were not nearly as important as national power and unity.
Hamilton agreed. Having grown up in the Caribbean, Hamilton had no deep loyalty to any state. His country was not New York, but the United States of America. He hoped to see his adopted country become a great and powerful nation.
Alexander Hamilton believed thatto become strong, the United States need ed to develop businesses such as this foundry in Connecticut. A foundry is a factory for melting and shaping metal.
Views on the Economy Hamilton’s dream of national greatness depended on the United States developing a strong economy. In 1790, the nation’s economy was still based mainly on agriculture. Hamilton wanted to expand the economy and increase the nation’s wealth by using the power of the federal government to promote business, manufacturing, and trade.
Before this could happen, the new nation needed to begin paying off the huge debts that Congress and the states had accumulated during the American Revolution. In 1790, Hamilton presented Congress with a plan to pay off all war debts as quickly as possible. If the debts were not promptly paid, he warned, the government would lose respect both at home and abroad.
Hamilton’s plan for repaying the debts was opposed by many Americans, especially in the South. Most southern states had already paid their war debts. They saw little reason to help states in the North pay off what they still owed.
To save his plan, Hamilton linked it to another issue: the location of the nation’s permanent capital. Both northerners and southerners wanted the capital to be located in their section of the country. Hamilton promised to support a location in the South if southerners would support his debt plan. The debt plan was passed, and the nation’s new capital—called the District of Columbia—was located in the South, on the Potomac River between Maryland and Virginia.
210 Chapter 11
Hamilton asked Congress to establish the first national bank. The bank collected taxes, printed money, and made loans to businesses.
Next, Hamilton asked Congress to establish a national bank. Such a bank, Hamilton said, would help the government by collecting taxes and keeping those funds safe. It would print paper money backed by the government, giving the nation a stable currency. Most important, the bank would make loans to businesspeople to build new factories and ships. As business and trade expanded, Hamilton argued, all Americans would be better off.
Once again, Hamilton’s proposal ran into heavy opposition. Where in the Constitution, his opponents asked, was Congress given the power to establish a bank? In their view, Congress could exercise only those powers specifically listed in the Constitution.
Hamilton, in contrast, supported a loose construction, or broad interpretation, of the Constitution. He pointed out that the elastic clause allowed Congress to “make all laws which shall be necessary and proper” for carrying out its listed powers. Since collecting taxes was one of those powers, Congress could set up a bank to help the government with tax collection.
After much debate, Hamilton was able get his bank approved by Congress. Once established, in 1791, the Bank of the United States helped the nation’s economy grow and prosper.
Views on Great Britain and France When the French Revolution began, Hamilton hoped that it would lead to the “establishment of free and good government.” But as he watched it lead instead to chaos and bloodshed, his enthusiasm for the revolution cooled.
When war broke out between France and England in 1793, most Federalists sided with Great Britain. Some were merchants and shippers whose business depended on trade with America s former enemy. Others simply felt more comfortable supporting orderly Great Britain against revolutionary France.
Hamilton favored Great Britain for yet another reason. Great Britain was all that he hoped the United States would become one day: a powerful and respected nation that could defend itself against any enemy.
loose construction abroad interpretation of the Constitution, meaning that Congress has powers beyond those specifically given in the Constitution
Political Developments in the Early Republic 211
Thomas Jefferson was one of America's greatest patriots. His strongest support came from the middle class: farmers, laborers, artisans, and shopkeepers.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
2 Chapter 11
11.5	Thomas Jefferson and the Republican Party
Alexander Hamilton’s success in getting his plans through Congress alarmed Thomas Jefferson and his fellow Republicans. In Jefferson’s view, almost everything Hamilton did in the name of putting the United States on the path to greatness was instead a step down the road to ruin. The two men held very different views on almost everything.
Personal Background Jefferson was born in Virginia to an old and respected family. One of ten children, he was gifted with many talents. As a boy, he learned to ride, hunt, sing, dance, and play the violin. Later, he carried a violin with him in all his travels.
Jefferson was also a gifted student. When he entered college at age 16, he already knew Greek and Latin. He seemed to know something about almost everything. He once wrote that “not a sprig of grass [is] uninteresting to me.” This curiosity would remain with him all his life.
With land inherited from his father, Jefferson set himself up as a Virginia tobacco planter. Like other planters, he used slaves to work his land.
Once he was established as a planter, Jefferson entered Virginia politics. Asa politician, he lacked the ability to make stirring speeches. Instead, Jefferson wrote eloquently with a pen. His words in the Declaration of Independence and other writings are still read and admired today.
View of Human Nature Jefferson’s view of human nature was much more hopeful than Hamilton’s. He assumed that informed citizens could make good decisions for themselves and their country. “I have so much confidence in the good sense of man,” Jefferson wrote when revolution broke out in France, that I am never afraid of the issue [outcome] where reason is left free to exert her force.”
Jefferson had great faith in the goodness and wisdom of people who worked the soil—farmers and planters like hint-self. State a [problem] to a ploughman [farmer] and a professor,” he said, and the former will decide it often better than the latter.”
Views on Government Republicans favored democracy over any other form of government. They had no patience with the Federalists’ view that only the “best people” should rule. To Republicans, this view came dangerously close to monarchy, or rule by a king.
Republicans believed that the best government was the one that governed the least. A small government with limited powers was most likely to leave the people alone to enjoy the blessings of liberty. To keep the national government small, they insisted on a strict construction, or interpretation, of the Constitution. The Constitution, they insisted, meant exactly what it said, no more and no less. Any addition to the powers listed in the document, such as the creation of a national bank, was unconstitutional and dangerous.
Along with advocating for a weak national government, Republicans favored strong state governments. State governments, they argued, were closer to the people, and the people could control them more easily Strong state governments could also keep the national government from growing too powerful.
Views on the Economy Like most Americans in the 1790s, Jefferson was a country man. He believed that the nation s future lay not with Federalist bankers and merchants in big cities, but with plain, Republican farmers. “Those who labor in the earth, he wrote, are the chosen people of God, if ever He had a chosen people.
Republicans favored an economy based on agriculture. They opposed any measures, such as the national bank, designed to encourage the growth of business and manufacturing. In their view, the national bank was not only unconstitutional, but against farmers. While the bank was happy to loan money to businesspeople to build factories and ships, it did not make loans to farmers to buy land.
Agriculture, according to Thomas Jefferson, was the most important part of the economy. He believed farming was the best occupation because it kept people out of corrupt cities.
strict construction a narrow interpretation of the Constitution, meaning that Congress has only those powers specifically given in the Constitution
Political Developments in the Early Republic 213
Views on Great Britain and France
Another topic over which Republicans and Federalists had heated arguments was the French Revolution. Most Americans favored the revolution until it turned violent and led to war. As you have read, most Federalists then turned against the new French republic and sided with Great Britain. For this change of heart, a Republican newspaper called the Federalists “British bootlickers,” implying that they were weak and eager to please the British.
Despite the violence of the revolution, most Republicans continued to support France. While regretting the bloodshed, they argued that the loss of a few thousand aristocrats was a small price to pay for freedom. For their loyalty to France, Republicans were scorned in a Federalist newspaper as “man-eating, blood-drinking cannibals.”
In 1793, the French government sent Edmond Genet (zhuh-NAY) to the United States as its new official representative. Genet preferred to be called “Citizen Genet.” French revolutionaries adopted this title to emphasize the equality of all people. His mission was to convince Americans that they should join France in its war against Great Britain.
Republicans welcomed Citizen Genet as a conquering hero. Large crowds cheered him as he traveled about the country. In Philadelphia, the nation’s temporary capital, a great banquet was held in his honor.
When Genet formally presented himself to President George Washington, he expected another warm and enthusiastic reception. Washington, however, did not want to be drawn into war with Great Britain. His response to Genet was cool and dignified.
Genet began making speeches against the president. These attacks on Washington brought thousands of Genet’s supporters into Philadelphias streets. Day after day,” recalled Vice President John Adams, the protesters ‘threatened to drag Washington out of his house, and... compel [the government] to declare war in favor of the French revolution.
This was too much, even for Jefferson. Calling Genet “hotheaded. • ■ disrespectful, and even indecent toward the President,” Secretary of State Jefferson asked the French government to recall its troublesome representative.
Edmond Genet, the French representative to the United States, attempted to convince Americans to join the French in their war with Britain. After Genet insulted President Washington, he was ordered to leave the country. Here, Secretary of State Jefferson presents Genet to the president in 1793.
Chapter 11
116 The Presidency of John Adams
When the framers of the Constitution created the Electoral College, they imagined that the electors would simply choose the two best leaders for president and vice president. That was how the nation’s first two presidential elections worked. By the third election in 1796, however, it was clear that political parties had become part of the election process.
The Republicans supported Thomas Jefferson for president that year. His support came mainly from farmers in the South and West. The Federalists supported John Adams, who appealed to lawyers, merchants, ship owners, and businesspeople in the North. When the electoral votes were counted, John Adams was elected president by just three votes. Jefferson came in second, making him vice president. The nation’s new top two leaders were political leaders from opposing parties.
sedition the crime of encouraging rebellion against the government
The Alien and Sedition Acts At first, President Adams tried to work closely with Jefferson. “Party violence,” Adams found, made such efforts “useless.” Meanwhile, Federalists in Congress passed four controversial laws known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. They argued that these laws were needed as protection against foreigners who might threaten the nation. In fact, the real purpose of the Alien and Sedition Acts was to make life difficult for the Federalists’ rivals, the Republicans.
Three of the laws, the Alien Acts, were aimed at aliens, or noncitizens. The first law lengthened the time it took for an immigrant to become a citizen with the right to vote—from 5 to 14 years. Since most immigrants voted Republican, Jefferson saw this law
as an attack on his party. The other two Alien Acts allowed the president to either jail or deport aliens who were suspected of activities that threatened the government. Although these laws were never enforced, they did frighten a number of French spies and troublemakers, who then left the country.
The fourth law, known as the Sedition Act, made sedition—encouraging rebellion against the government—a crime. Its definition of sedition included “printing, uttering, or publishing any false, scandalous and malicious [hateful] writing against the government, Congress, or the president.
Alexander Hamilton approved of this law, believing that it would punish only those who published lies intended to destroy the government.
Instead, the Sedition Act was used to punish Republican newspaper editors who insulted President Adams in print. One, for example, called him old, querulous [whiny], bald, blind, crippled, toothless Adams.” Twenty-five people were arrested under the new law. Ten of them were convicted of printing seditious opinions.
John Adams, a Federalist, was elected the second president of the United States by only 3 votes in the Electoral College. Thomas Jefferson, a Democratic-Republican who had 68 votes to Adams's 71, became vice president.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 215
nullify to refuse to recognize a federal law. This action by a state is called nullification.
states' rights theory the
theory that rights not specifically given to the federal government by the Constitution remain with the states
The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions Republicans viewed the Sedition Act as an attack on the rights of free speech and free press. Since the federal government was enforcing the act, Republicans looked to the states to protect these freedoms.
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison drew up a set of resolutions, or statements, opposing the Alien and Sedition Acts and sent them to state legislatures for approval. They argued that Congress had gone beyond the Constitution in passing these acts. States, therefore, had a duty to nullify the laws—that is, to declare them to be without legal force.
Only two states, Virginia and Kentucky, adopted the resolutions. The arguments put forward in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions were based on the states' rights theory of the Constitution. This theory holds that rights not specifically given to the federal government remain with the states. Of these, one of the most important is the right to judge whether the federal government is using its powers properly.
When no other states approved the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, the protest died. The states’ rights theory, however, was not forgotten. It would be raised and tested again in the years ahead.
The IMew National Capital In 1800, the federal government moved to the city of Washington in the District of Columbia. Most of the government’s buildings were still under construction. President Adams’s wife, Abigail, described the new “President’s House” as a “castle” in which “not one room or chamber is finished.” She used the large East Room for hanging laundry, as it was not fit for anything else.
In this political cartoon, a devil and a lion, symbolizing Great Britain, encourage a Federalist editor, represented by a hedgehog, to cross out important phrases from America's great documents. Liberty weeps at Benjamin Franklin's tomb.
Chapter 11
11.7 The Election of 1800
The move to Washington, D.C., came in the middle of the 1800 presidential election. Once again, Republican leaders supported Thomas Jefferson for president. Hoping to avoid the strange outcome of the last election, they chose a New York politician named Aaron Burr to run as his vice president.
The Federalists chose John Adams to run for reelection as president. Charles Pinckney of South Carolina was selected to run for vice president. Some Federalists would have preferred Alexander Hamilton as their presidential can-
didate. But the Caribbean-born Hamilton was not eligible to run, as the Constitution requires the president to be a U.S.-born citizen.
The Campaign The candidates outlined their campaign issues early. Jefferson supported the Constitution and states’ rights. He promised to run a “frugal and simple” government. Adams ran on his record of peace and prosperity.
The campaign, however, centered more on insults than on issues. Republican newspapers attacked Adams as a tyrant. They even accused him of wanting to turn the nation into a monarchy so that his children could follow him on the presidential throne.
Some Federalist newspapers called Jefferson an atheist. An atheist is someone who denies the existence of God. Jefferson, these newspapers charged, would “destroy religion, introduce immorality, and loosen all the bonds of society.” Frightened by these charges, some elderly Federalists buried their Bibles to keep them safe from the “godless” Republicans.
This Republican presidential campaign banner is from 1800. The banner reads, "T. Jefferson President of the United States of America. John Adams no MORE."
The Divided Federalists Hamilton and his followers refused to support Adams because of disagreements over the president’s foreign policy “We shall never find ourselves in the straight road of Federalism while Mr. Adams is President,” stated Oliver Wolcott, one of Hamilton’s close allies.
As the campaign heated up, Hamilton worked feverishly behind the scenes to convince the men chosen for the Electoral College to cast their presidential ballots for Pinckney over Adams. Pinckney seemed more likely than Adams to value Hamilton s advice and his firm Federalist principles. With Pinckney as president, Hamilton believed that he would be able to personally guide the United States into the new century.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 217
1
2
Here, Republican women help Thomas Jefferson win the election in New Jersey in 1800. Women were allowed to vote in New Jersey until 1808.
11.8 A Deadlock and a New Amendment
When the Electoral College voted early in 1801, it was clear that John Adams had lost the election. But to whom? Under the Constitution, each elector cast two votes, with the idea that the candidate finishing second would be vice president. All of the Republican electors voted for Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr. The result was a tie between them.
Breaking the Tie In the case of a tie, the Constitution sends the election to the House of Representatives. There, each state has one vote. Burr could have told his supporters in the House to elect Jefferson president, as his party wanted. Instead, he remained silent, hoping
In the presidential election of 1800, Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr received the same number of electoral votes. After almost a week of deadlock in the House of Representatives, Jefferson was elected president. The Twelfth Amendment was ratified in 1804 to prevent such ties in the future.
The Election of 1800
Presidential Candidate	Party	State	Electoral Votes
Thomas Jefferson	Republican	Virginia	73
Aaron Burr	Republican	NewYork	73
John Adams	Federalist	Massachusetts	65
Charles Pinckney	Federalist	South Carolina	64
John Jay	Federalist	New York	1
18 Chapter 11
the election might go his way. When the House voted, the result was another tie.
After 6 days and 35 ballots, it was Federalist Alexander Hamilton who broke the deadlock. He asked his supporters in the House to vote for Jefferson. Of the two Republicans, he said, “Jefferson is to be preferred. He is by far not so dangerous a man.” The tie was broken, and Jefferson was elected president.
In 1804, the Twelfth Amendment was added to the Constitution to prevent such ties. The amendment calls for the Electoral College to cast separate ballots for president and vice president. If no presidential candidate receives a majority of electoral votes, the House of Representatives chooses a president from the top three candidates. If no candidate for vice president receives a majority, the Senate chooses the vice president.
A Peaceful Revolution The election of 1800 was a victory for Jefferson and his Republican Party. But it was also a victory for the new system of government established by the Constitution. In other countries, power changed hands by means of war or revolution. In the United States, power had passed from one group to another without a single shot being fired.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about the beginnings of political parties in the United States.
The New Government Under Washington George Washington took office as president in 1789. In 1794, he ended the Whiskey Rebellion, a farmers’ protest against taxes.
Alexander Hamilton and the Federalists Hamilton and the Federalists favored a strong national government. They supported a loose construction of the Constitution. They also favored using the government’s power to support business, manufacturing, and trade. Alarmed by the violence of the French Revolution, the Federalists favored Great Britain in its war with France.
Thomas Jefferson and the Republicans Jefferson and the Republicans championed states’ rights and an economy based on agriculture. They supported a strict construction of the Constitution. Republicans saw the French Revolution as a step toward democracy and attacked the Federalists’ support for Great Britain.
The Presidency of John Adams During Adams’s presidency, Federalists used the Alien and Sedition Acts to attack Republicans. In response, Republicans urged states to nullify these laws.
The Election of 1800 and the Twelfth Amendment Adams lost the election of 1800 to Thomas Jefferson after the Federalists broke a tie vote between Jefferson and Aaron Burr.
In 1804, the Twelfth Amendment was added to the Constitution to prevent such ties.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 219
Reading Further
J
When John and Abigail Adams arrived, Washington was more an idea than a city. After the site was selected, the District of Columbia had to be built. This view is of the District of Columbia in 1801.
The President's House
What kind of home should the president of a brand new country live in? The early leaders had to decide this question. Congress gave George Washington the freedom to make this decision, and his ideas led to the building we know today as the White House. But it would be the second president, John Adams, who first lived in the house.
John Adams reached Washington on Saturday afternoon, November 1, 1800. Because travel at that time was difficult, no one had known ahead of time exactly when the president would arrive. As it turned out, he was earlier than expected. The only people there to greet him were a few workers and two commissioners who were overseeing work on the nation’s capital.
A welcoming committee was not the only thing missing when the president arrived. The building that the president would call home was little more than a shell on that November day. When Adams moved in, j only 6 of the 36 rooms in the president’s house were fit to live in. Only j 18 rooms had finished plaster walls. Fires burned in 13 fireplaces every day to keep the house warm and dry enough to live in. The fires also helped dry the plaster in the rooms that had it.
From the unfinished house, President Adams wrote to his wife, Abigail, who was still at their home in Massachusetts. He told her that “the Building is in a State to be habitable. And now we wish for your Company.” Abigail arrived two weeks later.
The First Lady was not happy about the condition of her new home. Shiver, shiver,” she wrote to her daughter. “Surrounded with forests,	j
can you believe that wood [for fires] is not to be had because people	!
cannot be found to cut and cart it.” Water, too, was hard to come by. Servants had to haul it nearly half a mile to the president’s house.
But Abigail made the best of it. She and John improvised. Abigail used what was to become the formal East Room for hanging laundry.
The Adamses even managed to entertain guests in their unfinished home.
The Adamses knew that the building would be beautiful one day. They also hoped that it would last for a very long time—like the nation whose leaders it would house.
A Palace for the President
George Washington had turned down the chance to be king of the United States. But Washington, a Federalist, believed in a strong central government, with the president playing a central role. He wanted the leader of the new republic to live in a house that reflected the president’s importance.
Chapter 11
Those who disagreed with the Federalist idea of a strong executive wanted a more modest home for the president. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, a Republican, favored a small central government. He wanted the president’s house to reflect that belief. So he proposed a plain house built of brick. To him, a big house built of stone, like those of European leaders, suggested royalty, and he wanted no part of that.
In 1792, Jefferson announced that he would hold a contest to choose an architect to design the president’s house. His advertisement for the contest required applicants to include “an estimate of the Cubic feet of brickwork composing the whole mass of the wall.”
But George Washington had other ideas. He wanted a presidential palace that was large and made of stone. He saw pictures of buildings designed by James Hoban, an architect who had trained in Ireland.
He liked the buildings, and he wanted Hoban to design the president’s house. Hoban entered the contest and, not surprisingly, won.
Hoban’s design was for a grand house. It was to have three stories and to be built of stone. But a lack of money limited his elaborate plans. The presidential home would still
look like a palace, but it would be only two stories tall, with only the first story made of solid stone. The second story would be made of brick and covered with a layer of stone.
In the end, then, the president’s house was something of a compromise. The fact that the new nation had limited time and money meant that Jefferson’s republican ideals were present, though Washington’s influence is reflected even more.
These plans from 1793 (top) show the final design for the president's house.
In 1800, when John Adams moved in, the building was unfinished. He and his wife Abigail lived there for the last four months of his term before Thomas Jefferson moved in in March 1801. In 1792, James Hoban submitted a plan (bottom) for the second floor of the White House. It looks very close to this today.
Building the President's House
George Washington laid the cornerstone for the president’s house on October 13, 1792. The outside structure looked finished by 1800, but it took another two years to complete the basic structure inside. In part, that is because builders stopped working on the house in 1799. They reasoned that it would be easy for one man to find a place to sleep—even if that man was the president. Finding a place for the legislature to meet, on the other hand, would be difficult. So they shifted their energy to building the capitol.
Political Developments in the Early Republic 221


z^/
.'J&,. -
S„^Y,.,,.
tsiiO^si-
iliiBij-
'/</.%. 4.* ;/
$*»* >•£'*


U ’ f :
Records show that slaves worked as carpenters on the president's house in May 1795. The men—Tom, Peter, Ben, Harry, and Daniel—"belonged" to architect James Hoban.
Many people were involved in building the president’s house. Some were immigrants. Scottish masons built the stone walls and covered the second-story brick with stone. The commissioners who oversaw the process had hoped to bring in other immigrant workers. But they had very little success, so they -	,■	turned to local laborers.
Many of those laborers were African Americans. Some were free, but many ;	;	;	' ;Jjj were slaves. The government leased the
slaves from their masters. Slaves dug the stone from the quarries in Virginia. They also made bricks, which they used to build the huts they lived in at the work site. In addition, much of the lumber for the building came from a slave-managed mill.
The regal-looking sandstone that George Washington wanted created a problem for the stone masons. Sandstone is porous (absorbent), so the masons made a whitewash to keep moisture out. They applied the whitewash like paint over the brick, but it sealed like glue. That is why the president’s house is white—although it was not until 1901 that President Theodore Roosevelt officially called the building the White House.
& **
k <*z* *-/
!//rfm? ^(V'tity^—
£**>■'
y£~"' *
fob ,
£~ ’ "~
This 20th-century painting shows how artist N. C. Wyeth imagined the building of the White House. In the painting, President George Washington confers with architect James Hoban.
Chapter 11
Continuity and Change
The White House today looks enough like the White House of the past that a viewer can tell it is the same building. But it has gone through many changes over the years.
Wear and tear took their toll on the building, even in the early years. By 1803, so much water had leaked through the roof that the ceiling of the East Room collapsed.
Many of the changes to the White House have simply kept the building up to date, outfitting it with modern conveniences.
Pipes installed in 1833 brought running water into the house. Heated water piped to the second floor allowed the first family to take hot showers. Starting in 1837, a central furnace took off the chill. Gas lights were installed in 1848 and electric lights in 1891.
Several major renovations have also ensured that the president’s house has remained the building for the ages that Abigail Adams envisioned. In 1814, British forces burned the president’s house, and only the external structure survived. The entire interior was rebuilt. During Theodore Roosevelt’s administration, a 1902 renovation added the West Wing for the president and his staff. In doing so, it doubled the size of the family’s living space.
But the 1902 renovation, plus the addition of the third story in the 1920s, put a
huge strain on the structure. A 1948 engineer’s report concluded that the White House “was standing up purely from habit.” A 1952 renovation gutted the building, strengthened the structure, and rebuilt it. Since 1952, no major overhauls have been necessary. However, repairs are ongoing, and in recent years efforts have been made to make the White House more energy efficient.
Although it has changed over time, the White House remains the home of the president, just as it was when John Adams arrived. Carved in the mantle of the State Dining Room today is the blessing that Adams made for his new home in that long-ago November of 1800:
Beginning in 1848, the chandeliers in the East Room were lit by gas rather than candles. Ceiling decorations were added to the room in 1853. In 2009, First Lady Michelle Obama welcomed musician Stevie Wonder as he performed in the East Room.
I pray Heaven to bestow the best of blessings on this House and all that shall hereafter inhabit it. May none but honest and wise men ever rule under this roof
Political Developments in the Early Republic 223
