Chapter 14
Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy
How well did President Andrew Jackson promote democracy?
Jackson, atthe upper left, greets his supporters after winning the presidency in the election of 1828.
The Granger Collection, New York
14.1	Introduction
The presidential campaign of 1828 was one of the dirtiest in U.S. history. The two candidates were John Quincy Adams, running for re-election, and Andrew Jackson, the popular hero of the War of 1812’s Battle of New Orleans.
During the campaign, both sides hurled accusations at each other, a practice called mudsling-ing. Adams, for example, was called a “Sabbath-breaker” for traveling on Sunday. He was accused of using public money to purchase “gambling furniture” for the White
House. In reality, he had used his own money to buy a billiard table.
The president’s supporters lashed back. They called Jackson a crude and ignorant man who was unfit to be president. They also brought up old scandals about his wife. Jackson was called “Old Hickory” by his troops because he was as tough as “the hardest wood in all creation.” But when he read such lies, he broke down and cried.
When the votes were counted, Jackson was the clear winner. But his supporters came from among the general population, not the rich and upper class. In this chapter, you will discover how his presidency was viewed by different groups of people. You will also learn how Jackson’s government affected the growth of democracy in the nation.
Men line up to vote in the presidential election of 1828.
Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy
257
Andrew Jackson was born on the South
Carolina frontier. In the early 1800s, he moved to Tennessee and bought a plantation called the Hermitage. His
first home there was a log cabin similar to this one.
14.2	From the Frontier to the White House
Andrew Jackson was born in 1767, on the South Carolina frontier. His father died before he was born, leaving the family in poverty. Young Jackson loved sports more than schoolwork. He also had a hot temper. A friend recalled that he would pick a fight at the drop of a hat, and “he’d drop the hat himself.”
The American Revolution ended Jackson’s childhood. When he was just 13, Jackson joined the local militia and was captured by the British. One day, a British officer ordered Jackson to polish his boots. “Sir,” he replied boldly, “I am a prisoner of war, and claim [demand] to be treated as such.” The outraged officer lashed out with his sword, slicing the boy s head and hand. Jackson carried these scars for the rest of his life.
Frontier Lawyer After the war, Jackson decided to become a lawyer. He went to work in a law office in North Carolina. He quickly became known as the most roaring, rollicking, game-cocking, horse-racing, card-playing, mischievous fellow” in town.
In 1788, Jackson headed west to Nashville, Tennessee, to practice law. At that time, Nashville was a tiny frontier settlement of rough cabins and tents. But the town grew quickly, and Jackson’s practice grew with it. He soon earned enough money to buy land and slaves and set himself up as a gentleman farmer.
Despite his success, Jackson never outgrew his hot temper. A slave trader named Charles Dickinson found this out when he called Jack-son a worthless scoundrel.” Enraged, Jackson challenged Dickinson to a duel with pistols. At that time, duels were accepted as a way of settling disputes between gentlemen. Jackson killed Dickinson with a single shot, even though Dickinson shot first and wounded him.
Chapter 14
The People S Choice Jackson entered politics in Tennessee, serving in both the House and Senate. But he did not become widely known until the Battle of New Orleans during the War of 1812.
His defense of the city made “Old Hickory” a national hero.
In 1824, Jackson ran for president against three other candidates: Henry Clay, William Crawford, and John Quincy Adams. Jackson won the most popular votes as well as the most electoral votes. But he did not have enough electoral votes for a majority. When no candidate has an electoral majority, the House of Representatives chooses a president from among the three leading candidates.
Clay, who had come in fourth, urged his supporters in the House to vote for Adams. That support gave Adams enough votes to become president. Adams then chose Clay to be his secretary of state.
It made sense for Adams to bring Clay into his cabinet, because the two men shared many of the same goals. Jackson’s supporters, however, accused Adams and Clay of making a “corrupt bargain” to rob their hero of his rightful election. They promised revenge in 1828.
Jackson’s supporters used the time between elections to build a new political organization that came to be called the Democratic Party, the name it still uses today. This new party, they promised, would represent ordinary farmers, workers, and the poor, not the rich and upper class who controlled the Republican Party.
In the election of 1828, Jackson’s supporters worked hard to reach the nation’s voters. Besides hurling insults at Adams, they organized parades, picnics, and rallies. At these events, supporters sang “The Hunters of Kentucky”—the nation’s first campaign song—and cheered for Old Hickory.
They wore Jackson badges, carried
Jacksonian Democracy the
idea that the common people should control the government
hickory sticks, and chanted catchy campaign slogans like “Adams can write, but Jackson can fight.”
The result was a great victory for Jackson. But it was also a victory for the idea that the common people should control their government. This idea eventually became known as Jacksonian Democracy.
This campaign poster shows the theme of Jacksons presidential campaign. His supporters said that if Jackson were elected, the government would finally be in the hands of ordinary people, not just the rich and upper class.
Jackson Forever!
The Hero of Two Wars and of Orleans!
'd'h® Mini kff'tb IP«®ip!l®3
HR WHO COI I O NOT BARTER NOR BARGAIN FOR THE
PRSsiDawsri
Who although “ A Military Chirflaiit? valued the purity of Elections and of the Electors, MORE than the Office of PRESIDENT itself! Although the greatest in the gift of his countrymen, and the highest in point of dignity of any in the world,
BECAUSE
It should be derived from the
PSOPUI
No Gag Caws! No Black Cockades! No Reign of Terror! No Standing Army or Navy Officers, when under the pay of Government, to browbeat, or
KNOCK DOWN
old Revolutionary Characters, or our Representatives while in the discharge of their duty. To the Poffs then, and vote for those who will support
OLD HICKORY
and the electoral law.
Collection of the New-York Historical Society. Negative #8838.
Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy 259
People of every color, age, and class mobbed the White House to attend a public reception after Andrew Jackson took the oath of office. One observer claimed thatthe scene was like the invasion of barbarians into Rome.

14.3	The Inauguration of Andrew Jackson
On March 4, 1829, more than 10,000 people, who came from every state, crowded into Washington, D.C., to witness Andrew Jackson’s inauguration. The visitors overwhelmed local hotels, sleeping five to a bed. “I never saw such a crowd here before,” observed Senator Daniel Webster. “Persons have come five hundred miles to see General Jack-son, and they really seem to think that the country is rescued from some dreadful disaster!”
Many of the people flocking into the capital were first-time voters. Until the 1820s, the right to vote had been limited to the rich and upper class. Until then, only white men with property were thought to have the education and experience to vote wisely.
The new states forming west of the Appalachians challenged this argument. Along the frontier, all men—rich or poor, educated or not—shared the same opportunities and dangers. They believed they should also share the same rights, including the right to vote.
With the western states leading the way, voting laws were changed to give the “common man” the right to vote. This expansion of democracy did not yet include African Americans, American Indians, or women. Still, over one million Americans voted in 1828, more than three times the number who voted in 1824.
Many of these new voters did believe they had rescued the country from disaster. In their view, the national government had been taken over by corrupt “monied interests”—that is, the rich. Jackson had promised to throw the rich out and return the government to “the people. His election reflected a shift in power to the West and to the farmers, shopkeepers, and small-business owners who supported him.
After Jackson was sworn in as president, a huge crowd followed him to the White House. As the crowd surged in, the celebration turned into a near riot. “Ladies fainted, men were seen with bloody noses, and such a scene of confusion took place as is impossible to describe, wrote an eyewitness, Margaret Bayard Smith. Jackson was nearly “pressed to death before escaping out a back door. “But it was the People $ day, and the People’s President,” Smith concluded. “And the people would rule.”
ill
io
:er 14
The Granger Collection, New York
In this political cartoon, titled "Office Hunters for the Year 1834," Andrew Jackson is a puppet master. He is pulling strings attached to people who wantto be appointed to public offices. What is the cartoonist's opinion of Jackson?
14.4	Jackson's Approach to Governing
Andrew Jackson approached governing much as he had leading an army. He listened to others, but then did what he thought was right.
The Kitchen Cabinet Jackson did not rely only on his cabinet for advice. He made most of his decisions with the help of trusted friends and political supporters. Because these advisers were said to meet with him in the White House kitchen, they were called the “kitchen cabinet.”
The rich men who had been used to influencing the government viewed the “kitchen cabinet” with deep suspicion. In their eyes, the men around the president were not the proper sort to be running the country. One congressman accused Amos Kendall, Jacksons closest adviser, of being “the President’s ... lying machine.” Jackson ignored such charges and continued to turn to men he trusted for advice.
The Spoils System Jackson’s critics were even more upset by his decision to replace many Republican officeholders with loyal Democrats. Most of these civil servants viewed their posts as lifetime jobs. Jackson disagreed. Rotating people in office was more democratic than lifetime service, he said, because it gave more people a chance to serve their government. Jackson believed that after a few years in office, civil servants should go back to making a living as other people do.
Jackson’s opponents called the practice of rewarding political supporters with government jobs the spoils system. This term came from the saying “to the victor belong the spoils [prizes] of war.
Jackson’s opponents also exaggerated the number of Republicans removed from office. Only about 10 percent of civil servants were replaced—and many deserved to be. One official had stolen $10,000 from the Treasury. When he begged Jackson to let him stay, the president said, “I would turn out my own father under the same circumstances.
civil servant an employee of the government
spoils system the practice of rewarding political supporters with government jobs
Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy 261
tariff a tax imposed by the government on goods imported from another country
secede to withdraw from an organization or alliance
14.5	The Nullification Crisis
Andrew Jackson’s approach to governing met its test in an issue that threatened to break up the United States. In 1828, Congress passed a law raising tariffs, or taxes on imported goods such as cloth and glass. The idea was to encourage the growth of manufacturing in the United States. Higher tariffs meant higher prices for imported factory goods. American manufacturers could then outsell their foreign competitors.
Northern states, humming with new factories, favored the new tariff law. But southerners opposed tariffs for several reasons. Tariffs raised the prices they paid for factory goods. High tariffs also discouraged trade among nations, and planters in the South worried that tariffs would hurt cotton sales to other countries. In addition, many southerners believed that a law favoring one region—in this case, the North—was unconstitutional. Based on this belief, John C. Calhoun, Jackson’s vice president, called on southern states to declare the tariff “null and void,” or illegal and not to be honored.
Jackson understood southerners’ concerns. In 1832, he signed a new law that lowered tariffs—but not enough to satisfy the most extreme supporters of states’ rights in South Carolina. Led by Calhoun, they proclaimed South Carolina’s right to nullify, or reject, both the 1828 and 1832 tariff laws. Such an action was called nullification.
South Carolina took the idea of states’ rights even further. The state threatened to secede if the national government tried to enforce the tariff laws.
Even though he was from South Carolina, Jackson was outraged. “If one drop of blood be shed there in defiance of the laws of the United States,” he raged, “I will hang the first man
. ., r	of them I can get my hands on
n n C rs*tree 1 can	He called on Congress to pass the Force
ill, which would allow him to use the federal army to collect tariffs
Uee j ’ L SamC time’ Con8ress passed a compromise bill that lowered tariffs still further.
andFtTed SUCh fifm °PP°sition> s<>uth Carolina backed down j. J Ciat'on crisis ended. However, the tensions between the
In this cartoon, John C. Calhoun, who believed states have the right to nullify federal laws, is reaching toward a crown. The crown symbolizes his desire for power. Andrew Jackson is pulling on the coat of a Calhoun supporter. He wants to prevent Calhoun from trampling on the Constitution and destroying the Union.
North and the South would
increase in the years ahead.
Andrew Jackson, on the left, attacks the many-headed Bank of the United States with a veto stick. Bank president Nicholas Biddle, in the center, wears a top hat. The many heads represent the 24 state directors of the bank. Vice President Martin Van Buren, in the center, chokes Massachusetts and Delaware.
14.6	Jackson Battles the Bank of the United States
Andrew Jackson saw himself as the champion of the people, and never more so than in his war with the Bank of the United States. The bank was partly owned by the federal government, and it had a monopoly on federal deposits.
Jackson thought that the bank benefited rich eastern depositors at the expense of farmers and workers, as well as smaller state banks. He felt that the bank stood in the way of opportunity for capitalists in the West and other regions. He also distrusted the bank’s president, Nicholas Biddle, who was everything Jackson was not: wealthy, upper class, well educated, and widely traveled.
The bank’s charter, or contract, was due to come up for renewal in 1836. Jackson might have waited until after his reelection to “slay the monster.” But Henry Clay, who planned to run for president against Jackson in 1832, decided to force the issue. Clay pushed a bill through Congress that renewed the bank’s charter four years early. He thought that if Jackson signed the bill, the farmers who shared his dislike of banks would not reelect him. If Jackson vetoed the bill, he would lose votes from businesspeople who depended on the bank for loans. What Clay had forgotten was that there were many more poor farmers to cast votes than there were rich bankers and businesspeople.
Jackson vetoed the recharter bill. Even though the Supreme Court had held that the bank was constitutional, Jackson called the bank an unconstitutional monopoly that existed mainly to make the rich richer. The voters seemed to agree. In 1832, a large majority elected Jackson to a second term.
Chapter 14
Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy 263
Sequoyah (sih-KWOl-uh) developed an 86-letter alphabetfor the Cherokee language. The alphabet contained both Roman letters and symbols Sequoyah created. Even though these Indians developed what many whites considered an advanced civilization, wealthy planters and poor settlers were determined to force them out and seize their lands.
Rather than wait for the bank to die when its charter ran out, Jackson decided to starve it to death. In 1833, he ordered the secretary of the treasury to remove all federal deposits from the bank and put the money in state banks. Jackson’s enemies called these banks “pet banks” because the president’s supporters ran them.
Delegations of business owners begged Jackson not to kill the bank. Jackson refused. Abolishing the bank, he believed, was a victory for economic democracy.
14.7	Jackson's Indian Policy
As a frontier settler, Andrew Jackson had little sympathy for American Indians. During his presidency, it became national policy to remove Indians who remained in the East by force.
White settlers had come into conflict with Indians ever since colonial days. After independence, the new national government tried to settle these conflicts through treaties. Typically, the treaties drew boundaries between areas claimed for settlers and areas that the government promised to let the Indians have forever. In exchange for giving up their old lands, Indians were promised food, supplies, and money.
Despite the treaties, American Indians continued to be pushed off their land. By the time Jackson became president, only 125,000 Indians still lived east of the Mississippi River. War and disease had greatly reduced the number of Indians in the East. Other Indians had sold their lands for pennies an acre and moved west of the Mississippi. Jackson was determined to remove the remaining Indians to a new Indian Territory in the West.
Most of the eastern Indians lived in the South. They belonged to five groups, called tribes by whites: the Creek, Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole. Hoping to remain in their homelands, these Indians had adopted many white ways. Most had given up hunting to become farmers. Many had learned to read and write. The Cherokee had their own written language, a newspaper, and a constitution modeled on the U.S. Constitution. Whites called these Indians the “Five Civilized Tribes.”
While the Five Civilized Tribes may have hoped to live in peace with their neighbors, many whites did not share this goal. As cotton growing spread westward, wealthy planters and poor settlers alike looked greedily at Indian homelands. The Indians, they decided, had to go.
The Indian Removal Act In 1830, urged on by President Jackson, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act. This law allowed the president to make treaties in which American Indians in the East traded their lands for new territory on the Great Plains. The law did not say
Chapter 14
that the Indians should be removed by force, and in 1831 the Supreme Court held that Indians had a right to keep their lands. An angry Jack-son disagreed. Groups that refused to move west voluntarily were met with military force, usually with tragic results.
This was true of the Sac and Fox Indians of Illinois. Led by a chief named Black Hawk, the Sac and Fox fought removal for two years.
Black Hawk’s War ended in 1832 with the slaughter of most of his warriors. As he was taken off in chains, the chief told his captors,
Black Hawk is an Indian. He has done nothing for which an
Indian ought to be ashamed. He has fought for his countrymen, the squaws [women] and papooses [young children], against white men who came, year after year, to cheat them of and take away their land. You know the cause of our making war. It is known to all white men. They ought to be ashamed of it.
The Trail of Tears Many whites were ashamed over the treatment of Indians and sent protests to Washington, D.C. Still, the work of removal continued. In 1836, thousands of Creek Indians who refused to leave Alabama were rounded up and marched west in handcuffs. Two years later, under President Martin Van Buren, more than 17,000 Cherokees were forced from their homes in Georgia and herded west by federal troops. Four thousand of these Indians died during the long walk to Indian Territory, which took place in the winter. Those who survived remembered that terrible journey as the Trail of Tears. A soldier who took part in the Cherokee removal called it the crudest work I ever knew.”
Trail of Tears the removal of Cherokee Indians from Georgia to Indian Territory in 1838 and 1839
This artist painted an unrealistic picture of the Trail of Tears. Most of the Cherokees had no horses or warm blankets. They were dragged from their homes and allowed to take only the clothes they had on. Many died as they walked barefoot for hundreds of miles.
In the 1830s, American Indians were removed from their homelands and sent to a government-created territory in the West. Many Indians became ill or died during this forced removal.
Led by a young chief named Osceola (ah-see-OH luh), the Seminoles of Florida resisted removal for ten years. Their long struggle was the most costly Indian war ever fought in the United States. A number of Seminoles were finally sent to Indian Territory. But others found safety in the Florida swamps. Their descendants still live in Florida today.
When Andrew Jackson left office, he was proud of having “solved” the American Indian problem for good. In reality, Jackson had simply moved the conflict between American Indians and whites across the Mississippi River.
The Indian Re
		
	w IS J >5	
V	r*A,.	
Wisconsin A v$ibw& fojibwa % .Territory !/{ 5	. A I 1
Iowa Z"<ez
[organized
ferritory
•4 ;«H.
New York.,
' * CT,X.
; | Ottawa y;	Ojiiiwa\/
\ *Michigan< , . z	? , s
O	Sv	Pennsylvania
Potawatomi	Ottawa A Z /	|\&J
, —Shawnee L L rt!f / Miami/	</DE
t'otawatomi ^avva ^Kickapoo Miami t Shawnee
Winois^^^ Oh'°
~	“^Indiana	r'fyyL j
Missouri ow^.<
Kentucky < ANTf
55», / «	Caro«"€z
TEXAS
idependent 1836)
South
^'Chicasaw \	i
Choctaw Mabc?elk Georgia	ATLANTIC
" OCLAN
S'"
ian homelands ian Territory
srokeeTrail ofTears, 1838-1839 er Indian removals, 1835-1842 indaries in 1838
v	i	250
I---------1_1-------->----,------------
0	250	500 kilometers
Albers Equal-Area Projection
500 miles
-

>6 Chapter 14
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about the presidency of Andrew Jackson and evaluated how well he promoted democracy from the perspectives of various groups.
From the Frontier to the White House Andrew Jackson was a self-made man who rose from poverty to become president of the United States. First-time voters, many of them farmers and frontier settlers, helped elect Jackson in 1828. His supporters celebrated his election as a victory for the “common man” over the rich and powerful.
Jackson’s Approach to Governing As president, Jackson relied on his “kitchen cabinet” rather than the official cabinet. He replaced a number of Republican civil servants with Democrats in a practice that became known as the spoils system.
The Nullification Crisis A controversy over higher tariffs led to the nullification crisis, in which South Carolinians threatened to secede from the United States. Although Jackson forced them to back down, the crisis was another sign of developing tensions between North and South.
The Battle Against the Bank Jackson thought the Bank of the United States benefited rich eastern depositors at the expense of farmers, workers, and smaller state banks. He also thought it stood in the way of opportunity for capitalists in the West and other regions. Jackson vetoed the bank’s renewal charter.
Jackson’s Indian Policy Jackson’s Indian policy was simple: move the eastern Indians across the Mississippi to make room for whites. The Indian Removal Act caused great suffering for tens of thousands of American Indians.
Andrew Jackson was the nation's first president from the frontier. He came to office with great popular support. His supporters viewed him as a president of the people. His critics did not believe he was the sort of man who should be running the government.
Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy 267
Reading Further
Images cannot convey the realities of the Cherokee experience. In paintings like this, Left in the Care of the Grandmothers, however, artists try to show the desolation of the journey.
The Trail Where They Cried
In the 1830s, thousands of Cherokees were forcibly removed from their homeland in the Appalachian Mountains. They had tried valiantly to hold on to their land, but their efforts were in vain. Like other eastern Indians, they were driven west on the Trail of Tears.
In 1890, John G. Burnett, a former soldier, wrote a story to his family on the occasion of his 80th birthday. He wanted to tell them about his experiences with the Cherokees. “The removal of the Cherokee Indians ... in the year of 1838,” he recalled, took place when he was “a young man in the prime of life.”
Burnett had grown up in eastern Tennessee, on the edge of Cherokee Territory. As a young man, he had roamed the hills and valleys of the Appalachians. He had fished for trout and hunted for deer and wild boar. He had also gotten to know many Cherokees. He spent time “hunting with them by day and sleeping around their campfires by night,” he wrote. “I learned to speak their language, and they taught me the arts of trailing and building traps and snares.” Through his experiences, Burnett learned to respect the Cherokees’ way of life.
When the removal began, Burnett was a private in the U.S. Army. Because he spoke Cherokee, he was brought in as an interpreter. In that role, he witnessed what he called “the most brutal order in the history of American Warfare.” He recalled,
I saw the helpless Cherokees arrested and dragged from their homes, and driven at the bayonet point into the stockades [fenced-in enclosures]. And in the chill of a drizzling rain on an October morning I saw them loaded like cattle or sheep into six hundred and forty-five wagons and started toward the west...
On the morning of November the 17th we encountered a terrific sleet and snow storm with freezing temperatures and from that day until we reached the end of the fateful journey on March the 26th, 1839, the sufferings of the Cherokees were awful. The trail of the exiles was a trail of death.
Burnett called the Cherokee removal a form of murder. Why was this tragedy inflicted on the Cherokees?
The Cherokee Nation
or centuries, the Cherokees had lived in the southern Appalachians. This was their ancient home and the center of their world. Like other southeastern Indians, they had lost land to white settlers during the colonial period. By the end of the American Revolution, their homeland was much reduced in size. But they were determined to hold on to it
Chapter 14
Unlike some American Indians who continued to fight white settlement, the Cherokees tried to work with the U.S. government to keep their land. They accepted the terms of treaties that limited their territory. They also agreed to the government’s efforts to "civilize” them. They took up farming as their main activity. They dressed in European clothing. They went to school and learned to read and write. They even created a republican form of government with a written constitution. They embraced the values of American democracy. They were, in the eyes of many Americans, a "model” Indian people.
The Cherokees were not willing to do everything the government wanted, though. They were not willing to sell their land and blend in with other Americans. They wanted to maintain their own identity as a separate Cherokee nation. This meant they were still an obstacle to white settlement and expansion in the South.
The state of Georgia, in particular, found the Cherokee position unacceptable. Georgia settlers felt they had a right to Cherokee land, and they had strong supporters to back up their claim. One of these supporters was Andrew Jackson.
The Cherokees had been faithful allies of the United States during the War of 1812. They had even fought under Jackson’s command against other Indians. But Jackson did not believe that Indians could live alongside white Americans. He wanted them moved out of the way, to lands in the West.
As president, Jackson allowed Georgia to put pressure on the Indians. This pressure increased after gold was discovered on Cherokee land in 1829. The following year, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act with Jackson’s support. But the president still could not force the Cherokees to move. Their land rights were based on a treaty with the government. They would have to sign another treaty giving up their land.
To the Cherokees, their homeland was the spiritual as well as the geographical center of their world. The thought of abandoning it was devastating.
I
4
Cherokee chief John Ross led his people for more than 30 years. After losing the battle to preserve their homelands, Ross helped the Cherokees move west.
American Indian artist Brummet Echo-hawk depicted the hardships of the removal in his painting Trail of Tears.
As the soldier moves the marchers along, one who did not survive is buried by the roadside.
The Removal
The Cherokee government, under Chief John Ross, had worked hard to prevent removal. It had appealed to the American people to win sympathy for its cause. It had also taken its case to court, asking the justice system to support the Cherokees right to their land.
But not all Cherokees supported these efforts. A number of Cherokee leaders believed that removal was inevitable. In 1835, these men signed the Treaty of New Echota, agreeing to give up the land and move west to Indian Territory. Chief Ross and the majority of Cherokees were outraged. They called the treaty illegal and asked Congress to cancel it. But their appeals failed. Everyone would have to go, they were told.
Some Cherokees—mainly those who supported the treaty—left voluntarily. But most waited until the deadline of May 1838. At that point, an army of 7,000 U.S. soldiers surrounded Cherokee Territory. They forced the Cherokees out of their homes and into temporary camps or stockades. “The soldiers came and took us from home,” one Cherokee woman recalled. “They drove us out of doors and did not permit us to take anything with us, not even a . . . change of clothes.”
Many Cherokees were held in the camps for months. Conditions were harsh. One missionary reported that the Indians “were obliged at night to lie down on the naked ground, in the open air, exposed to wind and rain, and herd[ed] together . . . like droves of hogs.” Some Cherokees escaped and fled into the mountains, only to be captured by soldiers and returned to the camps.
The march west began in the summer of 1838. It took place in several phases and along several routes. The first parties set out in June, traveling by land and river. But summer heat and drought conditions caused great suffering. The government decided to postpone further actions until fall.

In October, the removals began again. The 850-mile journey west took several months. Although some Cherokees traveled in wagons or on horseback, most went on foot. One witness wrote, “Even aged females, apparently nearly ready to drop into the grave, were traveling with heavy burdens attached to the back—on the sometimes frozen ground . . . with no covering for the feet except what nature had given them.” As winter took hold, conditions worsened. One wagon driver reported,
There is the coldest weather in Illinois I ever experienced anywhere. The streams are all frozen over something like eight or twelve inches thick. We are compelled to cut through the ice to get water for ourselves and [the] animals.
—Martin Davis, in a letter of December 1838
Several parties were held up by winter weather, unable to go forward for weeks on end. They suffered from exposure, disease, and starvation. These conditions were especially hard on children and the elderly. One woman recalled that “there was much sickness and a great many little children died of whooping cough.” Many Cherokees were buried along the trail.
Finally, in the spring of 1839, the last of the groups arrived in Indian Territory. By that time, some 4,000 Cherokees—around a fourth of all those removed—had died. The survivors would call this journey Nu-No-Du-Na-Tlo-Hi-Lu, or “The Trail Where They Cried.”
The Aftermath
At first, life in Indian Territory was hard. The Cherokees had no homes and few possessions. In addition, many of the later arrivals had bitter feelings toward the treaty supporters who had moved
west before them. They considered these people traitors. Violence sometimes flared between the newer and older groups of settlers.
Gradually, however, the Cherokee people got back on their feet. They formed a new government and set up farms and businesses. They also established a good public school system. John Ross continued to lead the Cherokees until his death in 1866.
Today, the Cherokee Nation in Oklahoma has around 240,000 citizens. Smaller, separate bands of Cherokees live in Oklahoma and North Carolina.
Many other Americans also have Cherokee ancestry.
For all Cherokees, the Trail of Tears represents a great tragedy in their history. But they also take pride in what they have achieved. As Chad Smith, the current leader of the Cherokee Nation, put it, We are not a people of the past. We are a people of the present, and for many centuries, we will be a people of the future.
The Cherokee heritage is preserved in the lives of modern Cherokee people, as well as in museums. In this Alabama museum, on the site of ancient burial mounds, a Cherokee guide (right) explains traditional uses of furs to visitors.

Andrew Jackson and the Growth of American Democracy 271
If
Unit 4 Timeline Challenge
Launching the New Republic
1789
Washington Becomes President
George Washington is inaugurated as the nation's first president.
1791
Bank of the United States
Congress forms the Bank of the United States, the idea of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, a Federalist who wanted a strong national government.

1780
at
1794
Whiskey Rebellion
President Washington successfully ends the Whiskey Rebellion, a domestic revolt against a tax on whiskey.

1797
Adams
Becomes President
John Adams, a Federalist, defeats Thomas Jefferson, a Republican, to become the nation's second president.
1796
Washington's Farewell Address
Before leaving office in 1797, George Washington calls for a foreign policy of isolationism, stressing that the United States should not entangle itself in other nations' affairs.
1798
Alien and Sedition Acts
The controversial Alien and Sedition Acts, which target immigrants and traitors, are signed into law by President Adams. Republicans are outraged by the acts.
Lit 4
1801
Jefferson
Becomes President
Thomas Jefferson becomes the nations third president. Jefferson believed in a limited national government.
1812-1815 War of 1812
At Madison's request, Congress declares war against Great Britain to protect U.S. sailors at sea and to drive the British out of the northwest.
1829
Jackson
Becomes President
Andrew Jackson becomes president, ushering in a new era of government known as Jacksonian Democracy and extending democratic rights to the common people.

1815
1820
1825
1830.
1835
1840
-2j
1809
Madison
Becomes President
James Madison takes office. His presidency is characterized by a feeling of national unity.
1823
Monroe Doctrine
President James Monroe declares that the Western Hemisphere is no longer open to European colonization.
1838-1839 Trail of Tears
Underthe Indian Removal Act, thousands of Cherokee Indians die when they are forced to leave their homelands and journey to Indian Territory.
Launching the New Republic 273
Unit 5
An
Expanding
Nation
15	Manifest Destiny and the Growing Nation
16	Life in the West
17	Mexicano Contributions to the Southwest
By the 1850s, the United States stretched from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Explorers like Lewis and Clark, who traveled on this river in Idaho in 1805, helped the nation expand.
$0
Unit 5 Setting the Stage
U.S. Territorial Acquisitions, 1803-1853
Ifi
Z ..-4

I
130°W
/
Portia^

4 Q
B R IflSHCCANADA

Claimed by


<0

Sacramd
Sant-
Francisco^
- 30'
’/V^


ilS
IISIANA .JMTORY,. 1803
.	i
- I

ew
lew York
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
/ PACIFIC I OCEAN
120°W
Formed by
||jjj| independence from Great Britain in 1783
f | Purchased from France
□ Annexed by treaty with Spain
■ Annexed by treaty with Texas
z Claimed by Orleans U.S. and Spain,
to U.S. 1819
181SG
20°N-



——*
G U I / () I j\l c A / c
w-
Gained by treaty with Great Britain
Santa FeTrail OregonTrail
---- MormonTrail
Annexed by treaty	~ CaliforniaTrail
after war with Mexico ------- Old Spanish Trail
Purchased from Mexico I	I Present-day
__________________L----------1 b o u n d a ry
100°W

90°W
80°W
■y w .
800 miles - ,
'° N
400
An Expanding Nation
In this unit, you will learn about the growth of the United States from about 1800 to the early 1850s. In 1800, the United States was bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east and the Mississippi River to the west. Farther west lay regions claimed by Great Britain, Russia, France, and Spain. By the 1850s, the United States had acquired these lands, more than doubling its size, and extended its western border to the Pacific Ocean. The map on opposite page shows the steps by which the nation's growth took place.
Picture yourself moving west along a trail pioneers used—the Oregon Trail or the Santa Fe Trail. The first half of your journey will cross a vast, treeless plain. On a good day, your wagon train might travel 20 miles. Rivers slow you down, though, as crossing them is dangerous.
Several weeks on the trail will bring you to an even greater obstacle—the ranges of the rugged Rocky Mountains. Here your progress will slow from 20 miles per day to 20 or so miles per week. Timing is everything on this part of your journey. The high mountain passes are open for only a short time each year. If you reach the mountains too late in the year, you may end up trapped by snow—which will likely mean your death.
Despite such challenges, thousands of settlers made this journey in the 1840s and 1850s. The map on the opposite page shows the nation's pattern of settlement in 1860. As the map below shows, the plains and mountains the pioneers crossed remained largely unpopulated by U.S. citizens, although American Indians had lived on those lands for thousands of years. Before long, however, that situation would change.
Population Density of the United States, 1860

fe
Population Density Per sq. mi.__Per sq. km
Over 160 96-160 32-96 8-32 1-8
Under 1
American Indians are not included.
An Expanding Nation 277
