Chapter 27
The Progressive Era
Did the progressives improve life in the United States?
27.1	Introduction
“The men who start the great new movements in the world,” said Samuel McClure at his college graduation, “are enthusiasts whose eyes are fixed upon the end they wish to bring about.”
Some of his fellow students may have brushed off McClure’s words as mere speech making. They shouldn’t have. This immigrant from Ireland was serious about starting what he called “great new movements.” In 1893, McClure began publishing a journal called McClures Magazine. McClure prided himself on knowing what people wanted to read about. “If I like a thing,” he said, “then I know that millions will like it.”
In 1900, McClure decided that Americans wanted to know the truth about trusts—gigantic business monopolies that worked to reduce competition. He hired a reporter named Ida Tarbell to write a history of Standard Oil, one of the biggest trusts in the country. Starting in 1902, McClure ran Tarbell’s report as a serial, printing one part at a time in issue after issue. The report told about unfair pricing that was putting Standard Oil’s competitors out of business.
McClure began hiring more journalists for his magazine. Some people called his journalists muckrakers because they raked up or exposed corruption in business and society. Writers like Tarbell adopted this name with pride.
Samuel McClure and Ida Tarbell were part of a larger reform effort known as the Progressive movement. Progressives did not work as a single group. Some fought railroad monopolies, while others focused on the problem of child labor. Some worked for equal rights for African Americans, and others worked to protect forests. Whatever their cause, most progressives wanted government to play a larger role in helping to cure the nation s ills. They believed that ordinary people could start “great new movements” that would improve life in the United States.
By the early 1900s, many children worked in factories, mills, and mines.
These "breaker boys" were photographed at a coal mine in 1911.
Samuel McClure (top) published articles by Progressive-era writers such as Ida Tarbell (bottom). Both were part of a movement that focused on social and economic problems created by industrialization.
The Granger Collection, New York
The Progressive Era 53I
I
Progressive movement a
social and political movement in the early 1900s that focused on improving conditions in American life
National Grange an agricultural organization formed in 1867 and committed to the economic and political interests of farmers
In the 1870s, angry farmers attacked the power of the railroads to set whatever rates they wanted. This cartoon shows wealthy "rail barons" carving up the country for their own profit.
27.2	Sowing the Seeds of Reform
The Progressive movement of the early 20th century focused on economic and social injustice, the power of big business, and political corruption. But progressives were not the first to criticize these conditions and to propose far-reaching reforms.
Industrialization began remaking American society shortly after the Civil War. To some, the rise of big industry meant endless progress and prosperity. Other people, however, felt left behind. As early as the 1870s, some of these “have-nots” began organizing mass movements to work for political and social change.
The National Grange Organized protests against the power of big business began on the farms of the Midwest. After the Civil War, many midwestern farmers were caught between rising costs and falling prices for their crops. Farmers felt victimized. Banks made it hard for people to get cash loans to keep their farms going in lean times. Grain storage companies and railroads charged high rates to store and transport crops. And merchants paid too little for what farmers produced.
In 1867, Oliver Kelley, a clerk at the U.S. Department of Agriculture, began organizing self-help clubs for farmers called the National Grange of the Patrons of Husbandry. The movement spread rapidly through the Midwest. By the mid-1870s, the National Grange had grown into a political force. Farmers used the National Grange to protest unfair practices by the railroads. Grangers banded together
to negotiate better prices and to start their own banks. They campaigned for political candidates and worked for such reforms as an income tax and laws against trusts.
Pressure from the National Grange led some states to pass laws that limited railroad shipping rates and prices for grain storage. Big businesses protested this interference. In 1877, the Supreme Court sided with the Grangers. In a series of cases, the Court said that states have the right to regulate private property when it is used in the public interest. The National Grange had won a key victory for the idea that government has a responsibility to help protect the common good.
Membership in the National Grange dropped in the 1880s as conditions improved for midwestern farmers. The farmers’ revolt continued, however, in the South and West, where organizations called Farmers’ Alliances took up the cause of reform.
The Farmers’ Alliances angrily challenged the influence of eastern bankers and industrialists. A favorite target was Wall Street in New York City, the nation’s financial capital. Mary Elizabeth Lease of Kansas charged,
It is no longer a government of the people, by the people, and for the people, but a government of Wall Street, by Wall Street, and for Wall Street. The great common people of this country are slaves and monopoly is the master.
The Populist Party In 1892, leaders of the Farmers’ Alliances founded a new organization that came to be called the Populist Party. The organization worked to build an alliance between farmers and industrial workers. Such a mass movement, they believed, could break the power of big business to dictate government policy.
That same year, the Populist Party adopted a platform calling for such reforms as an eight-hour workday and government ownership of railroads. That fall, Populist candidates won election to hundreds of state and local offices. The Populist candidate for president, James B. Weaver of Iowa, received over a million votes, winning six of the Mountain and Plains states. But that was the high point for the Populist Party.
Four years later, the Democratic Party adopted some Populist ideas as part of its platform. The Populists decided to support the Democratic presidential candidate, William Jennings Bryan. The Republican candidate, William McKinley, drew heavy support from business and financial interests. The battle lines were drawn between eastern capitalists and reform-minded farmers of the South and West.
McKinley won the election handily. His victory was a triumph for those who were opposed to radical change. The Populist Party, which had lost its identity after fusing with the Democrats, soon dissolved.
For the moment, big business and its allies reigned supreme. It would be up to other reformers to continue the fight begun by the Grangers and the Populists.
AT
Wealthy industrialists gave huge sums of money to help elect Republican William McKinley to the presidency in 1896.
Populist Party apolitical party, organized in 1892 by leaders of the Farmers’ Alliances, that supported such reforms as an eight-hour workday and government-owned railroads
platform a statement of the policies favored by a political party or candidate
The Progressive Era 53
27,3	Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller: Captains of Industry
When business leaders like Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller looked at the United States in 1900, they saw progress everywhere. Railroads linked towns and cities across the nation. The increased ease of delivering goods by rail had nourished countless new industries, including their own. Both men were proud to be “captains of industry,” leading the way in this growth. “Mere money-making has never been my goal,” wrote Rockefeller. “I had an ambition to build.”
Andrew Carnegie made a huge fortune in the steel industry. When he retired, he began to give away most of his money. This illustration shows him carrying libraries like gifts, symbolizing the money he gave to thousands of communities for libraries.
Industry Brings Progress New industries meant more jobs fora growing nation. With immigrants pouring into the country, the population of the United States tripled between 1850 and 1900. Every new factory or mill created jobs for the newcomers. Carnegie Steel alone employed more than 20,000 workers, many of them immigrants.
The nation’s new industries turned out a wealth of new products at prices ordinary Americans could afford. “The home of the laboring man of our day boasts luxuries which even in the palaces of monarchs as recent as Queen Elizabeth were unknown,” wrote Carnegie. “What were the luxuries,” he noted, “have become the necessaries of life.”
The Benefits of Bigness According to business leaders, the growth of big business made progress possible. Only big business enterprises could deliver quality goods at prices everyone could afford. As Carnegie explained in an article defending big business to its critics,
[The] cheapness [of goods] is in proportion to the scale of production ... The larger the scale of operation the cheaper the product. . . Instead of attempting to restrict [growth], we should hail every increase as something to be gained, not for the few rich, but for the millions of poor.
In Carnegie’s view, the growth of big business was the expected result of competition. According to this view, when many small companies compete in the same industry, some are more likely to do well than others. Those that are run most efficiently will grow larger.
Those that are not well run will perish. The law of competition,” Carnegie argued, “maybe sometimes hard for the individual, [but] it is best for the race, because it ensures the survival of the fittest in every department.”
538 Chapter 27
When Carnegie wrote about the law of competition” in business, he was borrowing an idea from the British naturalist Charles Darwin. Darwin had observed that, in nature, animals and plants compete for food and living space. Those that are best adapted to their environments are the most likely to survive. This idea was popularized as “survival of the fittest.”
Before long, some people began to apply Darwin’s idea to human society. The result was social Darwinism. According to this theory, people and societies compete for survival just as plants and animals do. The most fit become wealthy and successful. The least fit struggle just to survive.
Social Darwinism seemed to provide a “scientific” justification for huge differences in people’s wealth and power. It also lent support to the economic concept of laissez-faire, the idea that businesses should operate with a minimum of government interference. The best possible economy will then emerge naturally. By this line of thinking, it is misguided for government to try to correct
such problems as child labor, poor working
conditions, and unfair business practices.
■
social Darwinism the theory that people and societies compete for survival, with the fit becoming wealthy and successful while the weak struggle to
survive
John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil Company controlled 90 percent of the oil refined in the United States atthe start of the 20th century. His business methods were considered ruthless by his critics and brilliant by his supporters.
Giving Away Wealth In 1901, Andrew Carnegie sold his steel company for $250 million. Then he retired to devote his life to philanthropy, or generosity to charities. Carnegie believed that rich people have a responsibility to use their wealth to help others. “He who dies rich,” he wrote, “dies disgraced.”
Carnegie used his wealth to build concert halls, universities, and hospitals. Most of all, however, he loved building libraries.
A library, he said, “outranks any other one thing that a community can do to benefit its people.” Before 1880, few Americans had access to free public libraries. Just one generation later, 35 million people a day were using libraries that Carnegie had helped to build.
“Your example will bear fruits, John D. Rockefeller wrote to Carnegie. “The time will come when men of wealth will more generally be willing to use it for the good of others.
Rockefeller used his own fortune to fund universities, medical research, the arts, and education for all. During his lifetime, he contributed about $182 million to the Rockefeller Foundation, a charitable organization he established to promote “the well-being of mankind throughout the world.
■ill
MS
.44!

Ihe Progressive Era
The Granger Collection, NewYork
Teddy Roosevelt is shown here vigorously shaking the railroad trust. Roosevelt tried to break up monopolistic trusts to make American business fair for all.
regulation the enforcement of laws that control conduct or practices; for example, government regulations control the way goods, food, and drugs are produced and sold to the public
27.4	Theodore Roosevelt: Trust-Busting President
Not everyone admired big business the way Rockefeller and Carnegie did. Many thought big businesses took unfair advantage of workers and consumers. In 1890, Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act to prohibit any form of business monopoly. The law was so vague and big business so powerful, however, that for years the law was not enforced. The Sherman Antitrust Act got its first real test only after Theodore Roosevelt became president in 1901.
Breaking a Railroad Trust Roosevelt came into the White House with a reputation as a reformer. As president, he attacked business monopolies with great energy. “We do not want to destroy corporations,” he assured the public, “but we do wish to make them [serve] the public good.”
Roosevelt s first target was a railroad monopoly called the Northern Securities Company. This company controlled nearly every rail line between Chicago and the Pacific Northwest. Roosevelt had the Justice Department sue Northern Securities for violating the Sherman Antitrust Act. The Supreme Court ordered the monopoly to be broken up into smaller railroad companies.
Trust-Busting Expands Just after Roosevelt filed suit against Northern Securities, McClures Magazine began publishing Ida Tar-bell’s history of the Standard Oil Trust. In her report, Tarbell documented how Rockefeller had driven his competitors out of business. She told about secret deals he had made with railroads to ship his oil at lower prices than other oil companies paid. She explained how Rockefeller had cut his oil prices below what the oil cost to produce. This attracted customers away from other oil companies. After his
o^Petitors went °ut of business, Rockefeller raised prices again, s ocked public demanded action. Roosevelt filed suit against
°n’ but a8ainst 44 other trusts as well. In 1911, i was busted broken up into five major oil companies
and several smaller ones.
ent R°osevelt thought that government regulation, or
behTCem “Tk° aWS> WaS a 8°°d lon§’term solution to bad business
that tT1’ C SKeat devel°Pment of industrialism,” he said, “means
Governm	mCrease ln the supervision exercised by the
Government over business enterprise.”
540 Chapter 27
27.5	Robert La Follette: Fighter for Political Reform
In 1890, Robert La Follette of Wisconsin ran for reelection to Congress and lost. Still a young man, he returned to his work as a lawyer. Then, in 1891, Senator Philetus Sawyer, a powerful Republican Party boss, reportedly offered La Follette a bribe to “fix” a court case. Sawyer thought that he could pay La Follette to guarantee that he would win the case. An insulted La Follette reported the bribery attempt to the newspapers.
An equally insulted Sawyer decided to crush La Follette. But “Battling Bob was not an easy man to put down. Sawyer had made him so mad that La Follette decided to run for governor of Wisconsin.
As governor, he could work to put the party bosses out of business.
In Wisconsin and other states, political machines, or groups run by party bosses, controlled local and state governments. To make sure their candidates were elected, corrupt bosses were known to bribe voters and “stuff ” ballot boxes with fake votes.
Thus, the bosses—not the people—chose each party’s candidates for office. The candidates, men like lumber millionaire Sawyer, usually represented powerful business interests. Without the party’s support, upstart reformers like La Follette had little chance of reaching voters.
La Follette was defeated twice by Wisconsin’s powerful Republican “machine” but finally won election as governor in 1900.
Once he took office, La Follette pushed reforms that put the people in charge of politics. Wisconsin became the first state to adopt the direct primary. This election system allowed party members, not bosses, to choose party candidates. By 1916, more than half the states had adopted the “Wisconsin idea.” With the people choosing their leaders in primary elections, reform governors were swept into office across the nation.
Oregon introduced three other reforms that put political power into the hands of the people. The initiative allowed citizens to enact laws by a popular vote. The referendum allowed voters to overturn an existing law. The recall allowed voters to remove an elected official from office.
What all these reforms had in common, wrote La Follette, was a belief that each state could become a place where the opportunities of all its people are more equal . . . [and] human life is safer and sweeter.
Robert La Follette
BUI
Party bosses controlled the U.S. political system through a corrupt system of bribery. Reformers like Robert La Follette soughtto take power out of the hands of the bosses and return it to the people.
IpAil
in
is
Ai
The Progressive Era

I
Mother Jones
27.6	Mother Jones: Champion of Workers' Rights
In 1903, labor leader Mary Harris Jones—known as Mother Jones-went to Pennsylvania to support a strike by 75,000 textile workers. About 10,000 of the strikers were children. Jones wrote of these young workers,
Every day little children came into Union Headquarters, some with their hands off, some with the thumb missing, some with their fingers off at the knuckle. They were stooped little things, round shouldered and skinny. Many of them were not over ten years of age.
Child Labor Laws The situation Mother Jones found in Pennsylvania was not unusual. In the early 1900s, more than 1 million children under the age of 16 worked in mines and factories for up to 13 hours a day. To publicize their plight, Jones led a “March of the Mill Children” from Pennsylvania all the way to Oyster Bay, New York, to petition President Roosevelt to support child labor laws.
Ihe children’s march prompted stories and photographs of child workers in newspapers and magazines. Across the country, reformers demanded an end to child labor. Employers claimed that abolishing child labor would produce “a nation of sissies.” By 1909, however,
43 states had passed laws that outlawed the hiring of children.
Atthe turn of the century, school-age children worked long hours for meager wages in America's mines and factories.
Improving Work Conditions Progressive reformers also worked to improve the lives of adult workers. In 1903, for example, Oregon passed a law that limited women workers to a ten-hour workday. Maryland set up a program to assist workers who had been injured on the job.
New York responded to the tragic 1911 Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire by setting up a state committee to investigate conditions in factories. Based on the committee’s work, the state legislature passed 56 worker-protection laws. Many of these laws called for improvements in factory safety. One permitted women workers to take pregnancy leaves. (A leave is time away from work.) Another required employers to provide garment workers with chairs that had backs, rather than simple stools.
Mother Jones saw progress for the worker in such reforms. “Slowly his hours are shortened, giving him leisure to read and to think, she wrote. “Slowly the cause of his children becomes the cause of all-
542 Chapter 27
277 John Muir: Protector of the Environment
John Muir was so clever with machines that he might have been a great inventor. But one day in 1867, a file slipped from his hand and hit him in the eye. This accident sent Muir’s life down a different path.
After recovering from his injury, Muir decided to spend his life roaming wild places. I might have become a millionaire,” he said.
“I chose to become a tramp.”
Muir found his wilderness home in Yosemite Valley, a place of great natural beauty in California’s Sierra Nevada. “God himself seems to be always doing his best here,” he wrote of Yosemite.
Humans, in contrast, seemed to be doing their worst. Loggers were cutting down Yosemite’s ancient redwood trees.
Herds of sheep were stripping its meadows and hillsides bare. “To let sheep trample so divinely fine a place seems barbarous!” wrote Muir.
Yosemite was not the only wild place threatened by human activity. Rapid industrial growth and urbanization were causing massive environmental changes.
Loggers were felling the nation’s forests at an alarming rate. Miners were scarring mountains and polluting rivers. Many species of birds and animals were near extinction or already lost forever.
Concerns over such changes had given birth to a small but growing conservation movement. Some conservationists worried
most about dwindling natural resources. They advocated careful development of the wilderness. Others, like Muir, wanted to preserve wonders like Yosemite in their natural state.
To rally the public to his cause, Muir started publishing articles urging the passage of laws to protect wilderness areas. By 1890, his writings had attracted enough support to convince Congress to create Yosemite National Park.
Conservationists found an ally in President Theodore Roosevelt. While Roosevelt was in office, he increased the amount of land set aside as national forest from 47 million to 195 million acres. He also doubled the number of national parks. To Muir s delight, the presi dent also prohibited logging and ranching in Yosemite and other national parks.
“Wilderness is a necessity,” said Muir. “Mountain parks and reservations are useful not only as fountains of timber and irrigating rivers, but as fountains of life.”
Theodore Roosevelt (left) and John Muir (right) are pictured high on a cliff in Yosemite National Park. Muir founded the Sierra Club, an organization committed to the preservation of the environment.
conservation preservation and protection of a natural resource to prevent overuse, destruction, or neglect
The Progressive Era
W. E. B.DuBois
27.8	W. E. B. Du Bois: Spokesman for Equal Rights
In 1897, a black sociologist named W. E. B. Du Bois joined the faculty of Atlanta University. His plan was to study social problems “in the light of the best scientific research.
Everywhere he looked, Du Bois saw the terrible effects of racism on African Americans. In the South, Jim Crow laws segregated schools, trains, parks, and other public places. These laws also banned blacks from voting in most states. Blacks in the North were not legally segregated, but they still faced discrimination, particularly in housing and jobs.
African Americans who fought these injustices risked being lynched, or brutally attacked and killed. Between 1892 and 1903, almost 3,000 African Americans were lynched across the South. “One could not be a calm, cool, and detached scientist,” Du Bois found, “while Negroes were lynched, murdered, and starved.”
Du Bois wanted to do something, but what? Booker T. Washington, the best-known black leader of the time, advised African Americans to make the best of segregation. Washington was a former slave who had founded the Tuskegee Institute, a vocational school for blacks. He believed that job skills for African Americans would lead to economic progress and eventual acceptance. “The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremest folly,” he said.
Du Bois could not accept such thinking. In 1905, he gathered influential African Americans at Niagara Falls to push directly for voting rights. He wanted to see an end to discrimination.
In 1917, the NAACP, which W. E. B. Du Bois helped form, organized this silent protest parade against lynching.
i
This group of African Americans became known as the Niagara Movement. They continued to meet each year. In 1909, they joined a group of white reformers who were also dissatisfied with Booker T. Washington’s cautious approach. Together, they formed the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. The new organization pledged to work for equal rights and opportunities for all African Americans.
By 1920, the NAACP had over 90,000 members. Their goal was to make 11 million African Americans “physically free from peonage [servitude], mentally free from ignorance, politically free from disenfranchisement [denial of rights], and socially free from insult.”
544 Chapter 27
27.9	Upton Sinclair: Truth Writer
When Upton Sinclair wrote a novel about the horrors of slavery, few people bought his work. Then a publisher asked if Sinclair would write a book about factory workers who were treated like slaves. Sinclair jumped at the chance. Workers at a Chicago meatpacking plant had just been brutally defeated in a labor dispute. Sinclair decided to write about them.
Meatpacking Horrors In 1900, Chicago was the home of the nation’s biggest meatpacking companies. Disguised as a worker, Sinclair spent seven weeks in the slaughterhouses in 1904. There he observed how cattle and hogs became steaks and sausages. He saw employees with missing thumbs, and others whose fingers had been eaten away by acid. He heard stories of deadly falls into cooking vats.
Based on his research, Sinclair wrote a tragic story of poor immigrants trapped in poverty by greedy business owners. In his 1906 novel The Jungle, he described the horrors of meatpacking plants in great detail. He told of sick animals being processed into food. He described sausage made from old, rotten meat mixed with everything from sawdust to rodents. “Rats were nuisances,” he wrote, “and the packers would put poisoned bread out for them; they would die, and then rats, bread, and meat would go into the hoppers together.”
The Jungle became the nation’s biggest best seller since the Civil War-era’s Uncle Tom's Cabin. But readers were more upset about the contents of their sausage than the treatment of the “wage slaves.” “I aimed at the public’s heart,” said Sinclair, “and by accident I hit it in the stomach.”
BO
Jr
Upton Sinclair

Upton Sinclair shocked readers with his description of conditions inside meatpacking plants like this one. The unsanitary conditions prompted the governmentto begin meat inspections.
Safer Food and Drugs After reading The Jungle, President Roosevelt ordered an investigation of the meatpacking industry. When his investigators confirmed that conditions were as bad as Sinclair had claimed, Congress passed the Meat Inspection Act in 1906. This established health standards for the meatpacking industry and federal inspection of meat.
Other muckrakers revealed similar problems in the food-canning and drug industries. Also in 1906, Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act. This law requires manufacturers to use safe ingredients in their products and to advertise them truthfully. Future decades would bring more laws protecting American consumers.


IO
The Progressive Era
27.10	Alice Paul: Women's Rights' Hero
By 1900, women had won their fight for suffrage, or the right to vote, in four western states. Elsewhere, the drive for voting rights seemed stalled. The Progressive movement, however, breathed new life into the campaign begun at Seneca Falls in 1848. Many progressives believed that their reforms would be adopted more quickly if women had the right to vote.
A New Suffrage Movement In 1916, a young reformer named Alice Paul formed what came to be known as the National Woman’s Party. Older women’s groups had worked to win the right to vote state by state. Paul and her supporters were determined to win the vote by a constitutional amendment.
To build momentum for a suffrage amendment, Paul organized a parade in Washington, D.C. More than 5,000 women marched amidst jeers and insults from onlookers. Newspapers applauded the courage of the “suffragettes,” as the activists came to be known.
suffrage the right to vote
Passing the Nineteenth Amendment By 1918, women could vote in 12 states, but they had made little progress on the suffrage amendment. The National Woman’s Party began holding silent vigils outside the White House. The protesters held banners that read, “Mr. President, What Will You Do for Woman Suffrage?’’ and “How Long Must Women Wait for Liberty?”
Police arrested 200 women for blocking the sidewalk. While in jail, Paul and her supporters went on a hunger strike. When the jailers tried to force-feed them, the public became enraged. The women were released to a hero’s welcome.
Less than two months later, a suffrage amendment was approved by the House of Representatives by just one vote more than the two-thirds majority required. The amendment had been introduced by Jeanette Rankin of Montana, the first woman elected to Congress.
Suffragettes in the National Women's Party, along with women across the country, made banners, marched, and banded together to demand the right to vote.
546 Chapter 27
Senate approval took another 18 months. The states finally ratified the Nineteenth Amendment on August 26, 1920. That year, women across the country voted in their first national election.
Paul went on to draft another amendment guaranteeing equal rights to women. “I never doubted that equal rights was the right direction, she said, even though the amendment was never ratified. “Most reforms, most problems are complicated. But to me there is nothing complicated about ordinary equality.”
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the Progressive movement of the early 20th century.
Sowing the Seeds of Reform As early as the 1870s, farmers organized to protest the government’s laissez-faire policies and the growing power of big business. The Granger and Populist movements championed the cause of the common man and helped sow the seeds of Progressive reform.
Andrew Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller To men of industry like Carnegie and Rockefeller, calls for reform were misguided. All of America, they argued, had benefited from industrialization. The country was growing in wealth, and ordinary Americans enjoyed luxuries that were previously unheard of.
Theodore Roosevelt and Robert La Follette Unlike industrialists, many people thought big businesses took unfair advantage of workers and consumers. As president, Roosevelt broke up business monopolies, including the Northern Securities Company railroad monopoly and the Standard Oil monopoly. As governor of Wisconsin, La Follette helped put party bosses out of business by pushing reforms that put people in charge of politics.
Mother Jones Labor leader Mary Harris Jones—known as Mother Jones—fought hard to end child labor. Because of her influence, 43 states passed laws by 1909 outlawing the hiring of children.
John Muir Naturalist John Muir spurred on the growing conservation movement. His writings called for laws to protect wilderness and helped convince Congress to create Yosemite National Park.
W. E. B. Du Bois Sociologist W. E. B. Du Bois fought racism and discrimination against blacks. He helped to form the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which pledged to work for equal rights and opportunities for all African Americans.
Upton Sinclair In his 1906 novel The Jungle, Upton Sinclair described the horrors of meatpacking plants. The best seller prompted a federal investigation of the meatpacking industry and led to new laws protecting American consumers: the Meat Inspection Act and the Pure Food and Drug Act.
Alice Paul In 1916, Alice Paul formed what came to be known as the National Woman’s Party. Her work led to the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920, giving women across the country the vote.
The Progressive Era
Reading Further
These Pennsylvania breaker boys worked in the coal mine for 10 to 12 hours a day, six days a week.
Children at Work
The rise of industry changed the lives of even the youngest members of American society. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, children—some as young as four—worked in mines and factories. They worked on city streets and in tenement rooms. It would take decades of struggle to outlaw this kind of child labor.
Rows of boys—some only five years old—sat on wooden planks that lay across long chutes. High above the boys, huge carts dumped tons of coal into the chutes. As the coal came tumbling down, the boys sorted it, removing pieces of slate and stone.
The coal came from deep in the earth, where older boys and men had mined it. The boys who sat on the planks were called “breakers,” because it was their job to break up the coal and remove the impurities.
Work was hard and days were long. Lewis Hine, a photographer, described a typical workday for the breaker boys. As part of a campaign against child labor, Hine was taking pictures of children at work.
Foremen—breaker bosses—kept watch as the boys toiled atthe chutes, Boys who were not working hard enough or carefully enough soon felt a sharp rap on the neckfrom the breaker boss's stick.
The pieces [of coal] rattled down through long chutes at which the breaker boys sat. It's like sitting in a coal bin all day long except that the coal is always moving and clattering and cuts their fingers. Sometimes the boys wear lamps in their caps to help them see through the thick dust. They bend over the chutes until their backs ache, and they get tired and sick because they have to breathe coal dust instead of good, pure air.
Ihe boys got to work at 7:00 in the morning (many of their mothers walked them to the mine) and did not go home until 6 or 6:30 at night.
At best, the work was uncomfortable.
Ihe boys were not allowed to wear gloves because doing so could make them less efficient. So their fingers would swell, crack, and bleed until they hardened after a few weeks on the job. At worst, the work was dangerous. A breaker boy who leaned too far over might fall into a chute and be crushed or smothered to death.
Boys who caught their fingers in the conveyers might get them cut off.
When the boys turned 12, they moved to jobs in the mine itself. One such job was “door boy.” The door
boy sat 500 feet below ground. He listened for the coal cars coming from the mine and opened the door for them when they arrived. Lewis Hine described the lonely job, explaining that the door boy was “by himself nine or ten hours a day in absolute darkness save for his little oil lamp.” Ihe boy could not fall asleep, though. If he did, a cart filled with tons of coal might smash through the closed door and crush him
An 1885 law in Pennsylvania, the site of many coal mines, said that breaker boys had to be at least 12 years old. A 1902 law raised the age to 14. But the law was never enforced. Fake birth certificates were easy to come by. They cost only a quarter, and so a little boy might be identified as “small for his age” in order to pass for 12 or 14.
The 1900 census reported that 1.75 million children under the age of 16 were working in jobs in the United States. Considering how easy it was for underage children to get jobs, that figure is probably lower than the actual number of working children.
During the Progressive era—the first two decades of the 1900s reformers like Lewis Hine exposed the terrible conditions that children endured in industrial workplaces. They wanted to see child labor outlawed. But it would take until the 1930s for their efforts to win out. In the meantime, children labored at terrible jobs to make money that would help their families survive.
Working at Home and on the Streets
Coal mines were not the only place where children worked. They worked in mills where cloth was made, in factories where glass was made, and in canneries where fish was packaged. On farms, they picked crops and hoed fields.
This boy's job was to open the mine door for the full carts of coal. Lewis Hine wrote about the picture, "Owing to the intense darkness of the mine, I didn't notice the chalk drawings on the door until I had developed the photographic plate. These drawings tell the tale of the boy's loneliness underground."
The Progressive Era
Lewis Hine photographed this mother and her children making flowers at home in New York. Together, they earned only about 50 cents a day.
Most children who sold newspapers were boys between 8 and 15 years old. Very few girls worked on the streets. Most helped their mothers at home with ironing, laundry, sewing, and cooking.
Many children also worked at home, but they did far more than help with household chores. In the early 1900s, many adults brought work to their homes and did it there. This work was called “piecework,” because workers were paid for each piece they completed, no matter how long the work took.
One reformer described four-year-old Anetta Fachini working with her mother late into the night.
The frail little thing was winding green paper around wires to make stems for artificial flowers to decorate ladies' hats. Every few minutes her head would droop and her weary eyelids close, but her little fingers still kept moving—uselessly, helplessly, mechanically moving. Then the mother would shake her gently, saying .. . “Sleep not, Anetta! Only a few more—only a few more."
—John Spargo, The Bitter Cry of the Children, 1906
In the “home industries,” he continued, “the kindergartens are robbed to provide baby slaves.”
Children also worked on the city streets. Some boys worked as bootblacks,” polishing men’s shoes for a fee. Others delivered telegrams. The most common job for boys was selling newspapers. In 1899, newsies, as they were called, could buy 100 newspapers from the publishers for 50 cents. Then they sold the papers for one cent apiece. If they sold all their papers, they made a profit.
Selling newspapers was hard work. The boys waited outside the newspaper offices in the early morning hours to get their papers. Then they rushed out to sell their papers, using whatever skills and tricks they could come up with.

Selling newspapers could also be dangerous. Newsies who jumped on and off streetcars might slip and have an arm or leg run over. When a reformer raised money to buy wooden limbs for the injured boys, the boys refused to wear them. They preferred to get the sympathy of potential buyers.
Reformers worried about the newsies. The boys knew their way around the cities including the saloons, the gambling houses, and other unsavory places. But the boys themselves often liked their work. They felt proud and independent.
Fighting Back
Neither children nor reformers simply accepted child labor. The kids themselves fought for higher pay and better working conditions. For example, some frustrated Pennsylvania breaker boys fought back against one of the foremen who was particularly mean to them. They decided not to go to work one day. Instead, they went to a local swimming hole to play. When the nasty foreman came to get them, the boys pushed him into the water and dunked him. Eventually, another company man rescued him, but the boys won their case. They got a new foreman.
Children also followed the lead of older workers and went on strike. In the summer of 1899, the newsies struck against the New York Journal and the New York World.
The papers’ publishers had raised the price they charged newsies to 60 cents for 100 papers.
The boys decided to boycott the two papers. As the boys’ leader, Kid Blink, said, “I’m trying to figure out how ten cents on a hundred can mean more to a millionaire
than it does to a newsboy. I can’t see it.” After a two-week strike, the boys accepted a deal. They would pay the 60 cents, but they would be able to return their unsold papers.
Child workers improved their own situations, but reformers wanted to outlaw child labor entirely. Photographers like Lewis Hine and Jacob Riis showed the plight of working children. Their images helped change public opinion. Union organizers like Mother Jones led protest marches. Her efforts pressured employers and politicians. Groups like the National Consumers’ League and the National Child Labor Committee lobbied to end child labor. They wanted children to be required to go to school.
Change happened slowly, one state at a time, until 1938. That year, the federal government passed the Fair Labor Standards Act. The law restricted what it called “oppressive child labor.” Today, the Fair Labor Standards Act restricts the hours that children under 16 can work. And it prevents children under 18 from doing dangerous jobs, days of breaker boys and newsies are long gone in the United States.
Reformers worked to outlaw child labor. They pointed out that children worked in dangerous conditions in many industries. Children who worked in textile mills, for example, sometimes had fingers cutoff by the machines they tended.
The Progressive Era 55
