Chapter 2
European Exploration and Settlement
How did Europeans explore and establish settlements in the Americas?
In this statue in Barcelona, Spain, Christopher Columbus points toward the Americas.
2.1	Introduction
Europeans had no knowledge of the people of the Americas, half a world away, or the land where they lived. When Europeans looked west, they saw only a vast ocean.
Europeans were far more interested in the lands that lay to the east. In the late 1200s, a young man named Marco Polo traveled through Asia with his father, a merchant and trader from Venice, Italy. Marco Polo spent 17 years in China. When he returned to Venice, people flocked to hear his stories of “the Indies,” as India and East Asia were then known. He was called “the man with a million stories.”
Eventually, a writer helped Marco Polo put his adventures into a book. The book described the wonders Polo had seen in China. It told of rich silks and rare spices, gold and jewels, and luxurious palaces.
When Marco Polo’s book was published, very few people in Europe could read. Those who did read it were fascinated by its description of riches to the east. Merchants and traders were eager to find the fastest way to get there. The land route Polo had traveled was long and dangerous. His tales inspired explorers to find an alternative route by sea.
Some explorers would seek a route to China by going around the southern tip of Africa. But a few brave souls looked to the west for another route. Such a trip took courage, because no one knew how far west sailors would have to sail to reach Asia or what monsters and terrors might await them far from Europe’s shore.
In this chapter, you will learn how Christopher Columbus faced these dangers and sailed west to find a route to China. As you will see, his unexpected discovery of the American continents led to competition among European nations to explore and profit from these lands. You will also learn how Europeans established settlements in the American continents and, in the process, changed both Europe and the Americas.
◄ European explorers confronted many dangers and fears as they voyaged to new lands.
European Exploration and Settlement 25
On October 12,1492, Columbus stepped on land and claimed for Spain an island he named San Salvador. The people he encountered were peaceful, their only weapons being small wooden spears.
2.2	Spain Starts an Empire
Marco Polo’s book continued to be read over the next two centuries. This was a time of great change in Europe. The rediscovered writings of ancient Greeks and Romans inspired a new interest in learning and art. This period of lively new thinking has become known as the Renaissance, a word that means “rebirth.”
During this time, the invention of the printing press made books, including Marco Polo’s, more available. As Europeans learned about the world beyond Europe, they became eager to explore these far-off lands.
Columbus's Discoveries One of the people who was inspired by Marco Polo’s writings was an Italian seaman named Christopher Columbus. After studying maps of the world, which at that time did not include the Americas, Columbus became convinced that the shortest route to the Indies lay to the west, across the Atlantic Ocean.
Columbus looked for someone who could pay for the ships and men he needed to test his idea. Eventually, he was able to convince King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain to sponsor a voyage.
In August 1492, Columbus sailed west with three small ships. After more than a month at sea, his sailors raised the cry of “Land!” The land turned out to be a small island in what we now call the Caribbean Sea.
Columbus was thrilled. In a later letter, he wrote, “1 write this to tell you how in thirty-three days I sailed to the Indies with the fleet that the illustrious King and Queen ... gave me, where 1 discovered a great many islands, inhabited by numberless people.” Mistakenly believing that he had reached the Indies, Columbus called these people Indians.
In reality, the islanders were native people who spoke a language called Taino (TIE-no). The Taino lived in a peaceful fishing community. Never had they seen people like the ones who had suddenly appeared on their shores. Yet they were friendly and welcoming. Columbus wrote, “They are so unsuspicious and so generous with what they possess, that no one who had not seen it would believe it.”
26 Chapter 2
Columbus promptly claimed the island for Spain and named it San Salvador, which means “Holy Savior.” From there, he sailed on to other islands. Convinced that China lay nearby, Columbus sailed back to Spain for more ships and men.
Columbus made four trips to the Caribbean, finding more islands, as well as the continent of South America. Each time he discovered a new place, he claimed it for Spain. Columbus died still believing he had found Asia. Later explorers quickly realized that he had actually stumbled on a world previously unknown to Europe—the continents of North and South America.
The Columbian Exchange The voyages of Columbus triggered a great transfer of people, plants, animals, and diseases back and forth across the Atlantic Ocean. This transfer, which still continues today, is called the Columbian Exchange. The Columbian Exchange brought valuable new crops such as corn, potatoes, and squash to Europe. These foods greatly improved the diet of the average European. Many Europeans also found new opportunities by crossing the Atlantic to settle in the Americas. They introduced crops such as wheat and rice to these lands, as well as domesticated animals like horses, cows, pigs, and sheep.
For American Indians, however, the exchange began badly. The Europeans who came to America brought with them germs that caused smallpox and other diseases deadly to Indians. Historians estimate that in some areas, European diseases wiped out 90 percent of the native population.
Columbian Exchange the
exchange of plants, animals, diseases, and people across the Atlantic Ocean between Europe and the Americas
slavery the treatment of people as property. People who are denied freedom in this way are said to be enslaved.
Atfirst, Spanish settlers relied on the forced labor of American Indians to work their sugar plantations. When disease wiped out this labor force, the Spanish turned to African slaves to perform the backbreaking task of harvesting and refining sugarcane.
Slavery Comes to America
This high death rate contributed to the introduction of African slaves to the Americas. Many laborers were needed because some of the Spanish settlers in the Caribbean had started gold mines. Others raised sugar, a crop of great value in Europe. At first, the settlers forced Indians to work for them. But as native people began dying in great numbers from European diseases, the settlers looked for a new workforce. Before long, Africans were replacing Indians.
Slavery had existed around the world since ancient times. Often, people who were on the losing side in wars were enslaved, or treated as the property of their conquerors.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
European Exploration and Settlement 27
conquistadors Spanish soldier-explorers, especially those who conquered the native peoples of Mexico and Peru
By the late 1400s, European explorers in West Africa were trading guns and other goods for slaves captured by African traders.
In the 1500s, European slave traders began shipping slaves to the Caribbean for sale. Over the next three centuries, millions of Africans would be carried across the Atlantic in crowded, disease-infested ships. The terrible voyage lasted anywhere from weeks to months. Many died before it was over.
When the Africans arrived in the Americas, they were sold to their new masters at auctions. Many perished from disease and overwork. Those who survived faced a lifetime of forced labor as slaves.
Cortes Conquers Mexico After Columbus’s voyages, Spain began sending soldiers called conquistadors (kahn-KEES-tah-dors), across the Atlantic. Their mission was to conquer a vast empire for Spain. The conquistadors hoped to get rich along the way.
In 1519, Hernan Cortes (ehr-NAHN kohr-TEHZ) arrived in Mexico with horses and 500 soldiers. There he heard about the powerful Aztecs who ruled much of Mexico. When Cortes and his men reached the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan (tay-noch-teet-LAN), they could not believe their eyes. A beautiful city seemed to rise out of a sparkling lake. One Spaniard wrote, “Some of our soldiers even asked whether the things that we saw were not a dream.”
Ihe Aztecs were unsure what to make of the strangers. They had never seen men dressed in metal armor and riding horses. Some mistook Cortes for the great Aztec god Quetzalcoatl (kwet-zul-kuh-WAH-tul) and welcomed him as a hero. They would soon change their minds.
With the help of Indians who hated their Aztec rulers, and with the spread of smallpox—which killed large numbers of Aztec warriors—
Cortes, shown here with his translator, is trying to convince a group of Native Americans to help him conquerthe Aztecs. With the help of Aztec enemies and smallpox, Cortes captured the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan.
The Granger Collection. NewYork
28 Chapter 2
Cortes conquered Tenochtitlan. The Spaniards pulled the city down and used its stones to build Mexico City, the capital of a new Spanish empire called New Spain.
Pizarro Conquers Peru Smallpox also helped another Spanish conquistador, Francisco Pizarro (fran-SIS-co pi-ZAR-oh), conquer an empire in South America. In 1532, Pizarro led an attack on the powerful Inca Empire in present-day Peru. Luckily for Pizarro, smallpox reached Peru many months before him, killing thousands of Incas and leaving their empire badly divided.
Pizarro captured the Inca ruler, Atahualpa (ah-tuh-WAHL-puh), but promised to release him in exchange for gold. To save their ruler, the Incas filled three rooms with gold and silver treasures. Pizarro killed Atahualpa anyway and took over the leaderless Inca empire. From there, Spanish conquistadors conquered most of South America.
Explorers from several European countries took various routes to the Americas. Voyages were long and difficult and often involved travel on both land and sea.
Exploration of the Americas
European Exploration and Settlement 29
colony a new settlement or territory established and governed by a country in another land
2.3	The Spanish Borderlands
In both Mexico and Peru, conquistadors found gold and silver riches beyond their wildest dreams. Hoping for still more, they pushed north into lands that are now part of the United States. Because these lands were located on the far edges of Spains North American empire, they were known as the Spanish borderlands.
Florida One of the first Spanish expeditions into North America was led by a man named Juan Ponce de Leon (wahn PAHN-suh day lee-OHN). He had sailed with Columbus to the Caribbean and made his fortune by discovering gold on the island of Puerto Rico. Despite his wealth, Ponce de Leon couldn’t stop thinking about Indian rumors of a “fountain of youth” that made old people young again. Restless for more adventure, he set off to find the truth about these tales of everlasting youth.
Ponce de Leon landed on a sunny peninsula of North America in April 1513. Because he had sighted this lush new land on Easter Sunday, he called it La Florida, meaning “flowery.” (The name is short for “flowery Easter.”) Eight years later, he returned to Florida with 200 men to establish a Spanish settlement, or colony. American Indians in the area used poisoned arrows to drive off the invaders. Instead of finding a fountain of youth, Ponce de Leon died from a poisoned arrow in his stomach.
Although Coronado never found the Seven Cities of Cibola, his explorations opened a new area for Spanish settlement.

The Seven Cities of Cibola" Another legend sparked new Spanish expeditions into North America. An old European tale told of the Seven Cities of Cibola (SEE-buh-luh). These cities were said to be so fabulously rich that the streets and houses were decorated with gold and jewels. When the Spanish heard Indians tell similar tales, they became convinced that the Seven Cities of Cibola were somewhere in North America.
Spanish explorers first looked for the seven cities in Florida and present-day Texas. They found plenty of adventure, but no golden cities. Then a Spanish priest named Marcos de Niza claimed to have seen a shimmering golden city in what is now New Mexico. He raced back to Mexico Cit) with the news.

30 Chapter 2
The Coronado Expedition In 1540, a famed conquistador named Francisco Vasquez de Coronado (VAHS-kehz day kohr-uh-NAH-doh) set out from Mexico City with a large expedition and de Niza as his guide. Their goal was to find the legendary golden cities.
After traveling north more than 7,000 miles, the expedition found an American Indian pueblo. A pueblo is a village of apartment-like buildings made of stone and adobe rising four and five stories high.
To de Niza, this might have looked like a golden city. But to Coronado, it was a “little, crowded village ... crumpled all up together.” The enraged expedition leader sent the priest back to Mexico City.
The Coronado expedition continued north onto the Great Plains before giving up the search for golden cities. Disappointed, Coronado reported to Spain, “Everything is the reverse of what he said, except the name of the cities and the large stone houses ... The Seven Cities are seven little villages.”
Settling the Borderlands As conquistadors explored new territories, they claimed the areas for Spain. By 1600, the Spanish borderlands extended west from Florida across present-day Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California.
At first, Spain did little to encourage settlement in these far-flung areas. But when rival European nations also began to show an interest in the land, small bands of soldiers were sent to these regions to protect the claims. The soldiers lived in walled forts called presidios (preh- SEE - dee - ohs).
In 1565, for example, a Spanish naval officer named Pedro Menendez de Aviles (muh-NEN-dez day ah-vuh-LACE) was sent to Florida to protect the area from French explorers. Menendez successfully drove the French out of their Florida base and built a fort on the peninsula’s Atlantic coast. Menendez named the fort St. Augustine. Over the years, Spanish soldiers based at St. Augustine successfully defended the fort—and Spanish
claims to Florida—
from both French and
English rivals. Today,
St. Augustine is the
oldest permanent
settlement founded
by Europeans
in the United
States.



St. Augustine was originally a presidio, or fort, built by the Spanish to protect their claim to Florida. It is the oldest permanent European settlement in the United States.

„ LLpi-. > ■ ***	*, v *****i *	j
■r*,	A
■p* -
Lav;

J:
Settlement 31


i -C’vii'..
•*1 -

Missions were established to convert American Indians to Christianity and increase Spanish control overthe land. Missions included a church and farmland on which the mission inhabitants produced almost all of whatthey needed to survive.
Catholic missionaries accompa-nied the soldiers to the borderlands. Missionaries are religious people, like priests, who try to persuade people to convert to their religion. The missionaries built settlements, called missions, where they taught local Indians new skills and preached the Christian faith. Each mission grew its own food and produced most of what the inhabitants of the missions needed to survive far from towns and trading centers.
Hardy bands of settlers also moved into the borderlands, where they established towns and farms. Juan de Onate (own-YAH-tay), who had made a fortune mining silver in Mexico, led the settlement of New Mexico. In 1598, Onate brought 400 settlers and
7,000 animals from Mexico to New Mexico. The long overland journey took a year and a half to complete.
At first, the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico welcomed the newcomers. Unfortunately, the Spanish repaid the Indians’ kindness with cruelty. Indians were made to work for the settlers as slaves. Catholic priests ordered the whipping of Pueblo religious leaders who continued to practice their traditional rituals. Such treatment led the Pueblo people to rise up in revolt and drive the Spanish out. Twelve years would pass before Spanish settlers returned to New Mexico.
During the 1600s and 1700s, settlement of the Spanish borderlands proceeded slowly. But in time, the language, religion, and culture of Spain spread across much of the American Southwest.
missionaries people who travel to a territory or community in order to make converts to their religion
Impact on American Indians The arrival of Spanish settlers had a great impact on the native peoples of the borderlands. The Pueblo people, for example, learned from the Spanish how to use new tools, grow new foods, and raise sheep for wool. In turn, the Indians introduced the Spanish to new techniques for growing crops in the desert soil.
From Florida to California, some American Indians converted to the Catholic faith. The converts often lived and worked in and around the missions, growing crops and helping to maintain the churches and other buildings. However, even converts often continued to practice their traditional religious rituals as well.
Unfortunately, wherever the Spanish settled, they brought with them diseases to which native peoples had no resistance. Smallpox, measles, and influenza often wiped out entire villages. Before Coronado s expedition, there had been more than 100 thriving Indian pueblos in New Mexico. By 1700, only 19 remained.
32 Chapter 2
2.4	New France
As Spanish colonies sent ships loaded with gold and silver home to Spain, all of Europe watched with envy. Every year, Spain seemed to become wealthier and more powerful. Other nations wanted their share of riches from the Americas. But none was strong enough to challenge Spain’s American empire. Instead, they would have to seek their fortunes in areas not yet claimed by Spain.
coureurs de bois French fur trappers who learned many skills from the American Indians with whom they worked and lived
Claiming New France In 1534, France sent Jacques Cartier (zhahk cahr-TYAY) to explore the Atlantic coastline of North America. His goal was to find a Northwest Passage, an all-water route through the North American continent to the Pacific Ocean. Such a passage would provide a shortcut for ships sailing west to Asia.
Cartier failed to find such a passage. But he did claim for France the land we know today as Canada. He later named this land New France. Cartier also discovered something almost as valuable as Spanish gold—beaver fur. Beaver hats were a fashionable item in Europe, and French hatmakers were willing to pay high prices for beaver pelts.
Settling New France The first settlement in New France was founded by Samuel de Champlain (duh sham-PLANE). In 1608, Champlain sailed up the St. Lawrence River and built a trading post he called Quebec (kwuh-BEK). For the next 150 years, Quebec would be a base for French explorers, soldiers, missionaries, traders, and fur trappers.
From Quebec, fur trappers pushed west in search of beaver. They called themselves coureurs de bois (kuh-RUR duh BWAH), which means “wood rangers” in French. Catholic missionaries followed the
trappers, seeking converts among the native peoples.
Like the Spanish borderlands, New France failed to attract large numbers of settlers. The harsh climate of New France discouraged French farmers from crossing the Atlantic. So did the colony’s policy of granting the best land along the St. Lawrence River to French nobles who then planned to rent it out to farmers. The few settlers who did come soon got tired of renting and left their farms to search for furs.
Coureurs de bois, or fur trappers, roamed New France in search of beaver pelts. They learned their trapping skills from the American Indians.
European Exploration and Settlement 33
The French made friends with the American Indians in New France and often assisted them in battles with their enemies. Here, Samuel de Champlain, in the center, helps the Huron defeat the Iroquois.
American Indian Business Partners Because the French were more interested in furs than farming, they did not try to conquer the Indians and put them to work as the Spanish had done. Instead, the French made American Indians their business partners.
After founding Quebec, Champlain made friends with the nearby Indians, especially the Huron. Fur trappers lived in Huron villages, learned the Huron language, and married Huron women. From the Huron they learned how to survive for months in the wilderness. Unfortunately, the friendship exposed the Huron to European diseases, which swept through their villages and killed many of them.
Champlain even joined the Huron in an attack on their enemy, the Iroquois. He later wrote,
I marched some 20 paces in advance of the rest, until I was within about 30 paces of the enemy . . . When I saw them making a move to fire at us, I rested my musket against my cheek, and aimed directly at one of the three chiefs. With that same shot, two fell to the ground; and one of their men was so wounded that he died some time after. . . When our side saw this shot. . . they began to raise such loud cries that one could not have heard it thunder.
The astonished Iroquois, who had never seen or heard gunfire before, fled in terror. From that day on, the Iroquois would be the bitter enemies of the French.
Claiming Louisiana The search for furs led the French far inland from Quebec. In 1673, two explorers, Father Marquette (mahr-KET) and Louis Joliet (zhal-YAY), explored the great Mississippi River. They hoped this waterway would be the long-sought Northwest Passage. But they discovered that, instead of flowing west to the Pacific Ocean, the river flowed south toward the Gulf of Mexico. Disappointed, the explorers returned to New France.
Nine years later, Robert Cavelier de La Salle explored the entire length of the Mississippi River. On April 9, 1682, he planted a French
ag at the mouth of the river and claimed everything west of the Mississippi River for France. La Salle named this vast area Louisiana tor the French monarch, King Louis XIV.
34 Chapter 2
2.5	Jamestown: The First English Colony
Columbus’s voyages inspired John Cabot, an Italian living in England, to seek his own western route to Asia. In 1497, Cabot, who had moved to England from Venice, sailed west across the Atlantic. He landed in Newfoundland, an island off the coast of Canada. A fellow Venetian living in London wrote of Cabot’s brief landing,
He coasted for three hundred leagues and landed; saw no human beings, but he has brought here to the king certain snares which had been set to catch game, and a needle for making nets; he also found some felled trees, by which he judged there were inhabitants, and returned to his ship in alarm ... The discoverer... planted on this newly-found land a large cross, with one flag of England and another of St. Mark [the patron saint of Venice] on account of his being a Venetian.
John Cabot, an Italian exploring for England, sailed to Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, off the coast of present-day Canada. He believed he had reached Asia and claimed the land for England.
Like Columbus, Cabot mistakenly believed he had landed in Asia. Later, however, England would claim all of North America because of the flag planted by Cabot in 1497.
The Lost Colony of Roanoke
Nearly a century later, an English noble named Sir Walter Raleigh tried to start a colony on Roanoke Island off the coast of present-day North Carolina. Indians on the island welcomed the settlers and gave them traps for catching fish. The newcomers, however, were more interested in looking for gold than fishing. When their supplies ran low, they returned to England.
In 1587, Raleigh sent a second group of colonists to Roanoke. Unfortunately, they arrived too late in the season to plant crops. Their leader, John White, sailed back to England for more supplies. While White was in England, however, fighting broke out between England and Spain. As a result, his return to Roanoke was delayed for three years.
When White finally reached the island, the colonists had disappeared. Carved on a doorpost was the word CROATOAN. To this day, both the reason this word was carved and what happened to the lost colony of Roanoke remain a mystery.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
European Exploration and Settlement 35
The first colonists at Jamestown settled in an area they believed would be easy to defend against American Indians and the Spanish. However, the land was marshy and infested with malaria-carrying mosquitoes.
Settling Jamestown Twenty years went by before a permanent English colony was established in America. In 1607, a group of merchants formed the London Company to start a moneymaking colony in Virginia. The company crammed 105 settlers and 39 sailors into three tiny ships and sent them across the Atlantic. The settlers were to ship back valuable goods such as furs and timber.
When they reached Virginia, the colonists settled on a swampy peninsula they believed could be easily defended against American Indians or Spanish ships. They called their new home Jamestown after King James I. What the settlers didn’t know was that the spot they chose to settle would soon be swarming with disease-carrying mosquitoes. It was also surrounded by a large and powerful American Indian group.
To make matters worse, the Jamestown settlers were a mix of gentlemen and craftsmen. None of them knew much about farming. Nor were they willing to work very hard at it. They thought they were in Virginia to look for gold, not to provide for themselves.
As the food the settlers had brought with them disappeared, they began to trade with the Indians, bartering glass beads and iron hatchets for corn and meat. But barter wasn’t easy. Many Indians decided they would sooner kill the English—or just let them starve—than trade. Hunger and disease soon took their toll. Every few days, another body was carried off to the graveyard.
John Smith was one of the members of the Jamestown expedition. A natural leader, Smith took control of Jamestown in 1608. “If any would not work,” announced Smith, “neither should he eat.” They were hungry, so they worked.
36 Chapt er 2
Pocahontas, the daughter of a powerful Indian leader, broughtfood to the Jamestown settlers and helped them survive. She later married John Rolfe and visited England with him. This portrait of Pocahontas in European dress is the only authentic painting of her.
Smith wrote an account of how he met an Indian girl whose help saved the colony from starvation. While scouting for food, Smith was captured by the Indians and brought to a smoky longhouse.
Seated at one end, he saw Powhatan, the Indians’ powerful chief.
The Indians greeted Smith with a loud shout and a great feast.
But when the meal ended, the mood changed. Smith was about to be clubbed to death when a young girl leapt out of the shadows.
“She got [my] head in her armes and laid her owne upon [mine] to save [me] from death,” Smith later wrote.
Smith’s savior was Pocahontas, Chief Powhatan’s favorite daughter. Historians disagree about the details of how Smith and Pocahontas first met. They do agree, however, that Pocahontas helped Smith save Jamestown by bringing food and keeping peace with her people. “She, next under God,” Smith wrote, “was ... the instrument to preserve this colony from death, famine, and utter confusion.”
The Starving Time Jamestown’s troubles, however, were far from over. In the fall of 1609, after being injured in a gunpowder explosion, Smith returned to England. The following winter was the worst ever— so bad that it came to be known as the “Starving Time.”
Without the encouragement of Smith and Pocahontas, the Indians refused to trade with the settlers. The English ate dogs, rats, and even human corpses to survive. By spring, only 60 of the 500 people Smith had left in the fall remained alive.
When supply ships came the next spring, the survivors were ordered to abandon their colony. Then three more English ships brought food, 150 new colonists, and 100 soldiers. Jamestown was saved again.
Jamestown Survives Even with more settlers, the people of Jamestown lived in constant danger of Indian attacks. To end that threat, the English kidnapped Pocahontas and held her hostage. For a year, Pocahontas remained a prisoner—but a willing and curious one. During that time she learned English, adopted the Christian faith, and made new friends.
Among those new friends was a widower named John Rolfe. Rolfe had already helped the colony survive by finding a crop that could be raised in Virginia and sold for good prices in England—tobacco. The happy settlers went tobacco mad, planting the crop everywhere, even in Jamestown’s streets.
Now Rolfe helped again by making a marriage proposal to Pocahontas. Both the governor of Jamestown and Chief Powhatan gave their consent to this unusual match. Maybe they hoped the marriage would help end the conflict between their peoples.
The union of Pocahontas and John Rolfe did bring peace to Jamestown. In 1616, Rolfe wrote, “Our people yearly plant and reap quietly, and travel in the woods ... as freely and securely from danger ... as in England.”
European Exploration and Settlement 37
NewYork
Peter Minuit is shown offering American Indians knives, beads, blankets, and trinkets worth about $24 in exchange for Manhattan Island.
2.6	New Netherland: The Short-Lived Dutch Settlement
While John Smith was struggling to save the colony of Jamestown, an English sailor named Henry Hudson was exploring the coastline farther north for the Netherlands. Henry Hudsons voyage was sponsored by Dutch merchants who hoped to find the Northwest Passage. (The people of the Netherlands are called the Dutch.)
In 1609, Hudson discovered a deep river full of fish and thought it might just take him all the way across the continent. It didn’t, of course, but he claimed the land along its banks for the Netherlands. The river was later named the Hudson in his honor, and the territory he claimed became known as New Netherland.
In 1621, Dutch merchants formed the Dutch West India Company to start a colony in America. The first Dutch colonists settled along the upper Hudson, where they built Fort Orange, near present-day Albany, New York. The new colonists quickly found that there were good profits to be made in the fur trade. They established trading posts along the Hudson River. The largest was on Manhattan Island at the river’s mouth.
Relations with American Indians In 1626, the Dutch West India Company sent Peter Minuit (MIN-yu-what) to New Netherland as the colony’s governor. Wanting peaceful relations with the Indians, the company told Minuit that any native peoples on Manhattan Island “must not be expelled with violence or threats but be persuaded with kind words ... or should be given something.”
Following orders, Minuit offered the island’s Indians iron pots, beads, and blankets worth about $24 in exchange for their land.
38 Chapter 2
The American Indians didn’t believe that anyone could own land. Laughing at the foolishness of the white men, they made the trade.
Dutch traders also made deals with members of the powerful Iroquois Confederacy, an alliance of five Indian groups who lived across the northern portion of New Netherland. The French had long supplied the Huron, the Iroquois’s great rivals, with guns in exchange for furs. It made sense for the Iroquois to become partners with the Dutch, who supplied them with the weapons they needed to stand up to the Huron.
This partnership also made sense for the Dutch. The French were their main rivals in the European fur trade. For most of the 1600s, the Iroquois kept the French from moving into the fur-rich Ohio Valley.
New Amsterdam As the fur trade expanded, the Dutch settlement on Manhattan swelled to over 1,000 people. In 1647, the Dutch West India Company hired Peter Stuyvesant (STY-vuh-sunt) as the colony’s new governor. When he arrived at Manhattan, Stuyvesant declared that the settlement would be called New Amsterdam, after the capital city of the Netherlands.
European countries established settlements throughout North and South America. Which European country first settled the area in which you live?
European Exploration and Settlement 39
Peter Stuyvesant, the Dutch governor of New Amsterdam, surrendered the settlement to the British without a shot being fired. Outnumbered and outgunned, Stuyvesant bowed to the pleas of his people to avoid bloodshed and destruction.
Stuyvesant had lost his right leg in battle, and he stomped around on a wooden leg decorated with silver nails. People called him “Old Silvernails” or “Peg Leg Pete.” Although he was a strong leader, Old Silvernails was generally disliked. When Dutchmen who had been elected as city councilors disagreed with him, he called them “ignorant subjects” and threatened to ship them back to the Netherlands in pieces if they gave him trouble.
Despite his reputation as a grouch, Stuyvesant governed New Amsterdam for 17 years. During this time, he captured a nearby Swedish colony and invited its settlers to live in New Amsterdam. By 1660, the colony had nearly 8,000 people, including Europeans from many nations as well as enslaved Africans. New Amsterdam also provided refuge for Jews who were seeking a place to practice their religion freely.
New Netherland Becomes New York Stuyvesant’s biggest problem was that the English wanted to drive the Dutch out of North America. England’s king, Charles II, refused to recognize Dutch claims to New Netherland. In 1664, Charles gave his brother, James, the Duke of York, ownership of all Dutch lands in America—if he could conquer them.
James promptly organized a small invasion fleet to take the colony. When the English arrived, they sent Stuyvesant a letter demanding his surrender. Stuyvesant tore up the note and refused to consider giving up until New Amsterdam’s chief gunner reported that the city’s supply of gunpowder was damp and useless. Without firing a shot, the English took over New Netherland and renamed the colony New York.
40 Chapter 2
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about the first European settlements in the Americas.
Discovery and Competition Explorers like Christopher Columbus were looking for a westward route to Asia when they stumbled onto the American continents. European nations competed to claim these new lands and the riches they might contain.
Spain Spain claimed vast territories, including Mexico and the southwestern portion of the future United States. In their search for gold and other treasures, Spanish conquistadors conquered the Aztecs of Mexico and the Incas of Peru. The Spanish also brought enslaved Africans to the Americas to plant and harvest crops. In the American Southwest, Spanish missionaries worked to convert American Indians to Christianity.
France The French staked a claim to much of present-day Canada, as well as Louisiana, the territory west of the Mississippi River. Most French settlers were more interested in trapping and trading furs than in farming or establishing large settlements.
England The English based their claim to North America on John Cabot’s 1497 voyage. After several attempts, the English established their first permanent colony at Jamestown in Virginia.
The Netherlands The Dutch established a foothold in North America by founding the colony of New Netherland. The English, however, drove the Dutch out and renamed the colony New York.
Effects on American Indians For American Indians, the arrival of Europeans brought many changes, including new technology and new ideas. But they also brought deadly diseases that killed great numbers of the first Americans.
The Granger Collection, New York
The exploration and settlement of the
American continents brought amazing
changes both to Europe and to the Americas.
European Exploration and Settlement 41
Reading Further
No one knows exactly what Columbus looked like. This is the earliest known portrait of him, painted 13 years after his death.
Who Was the Real Columbus?
Few historical figures are more famous than Christopher Columbus. Yet history has given us many different views of this man. To some people, Columbus was a great hero, the brave explorer who introduced the Americas to Europe. To others, he was a greedy conqueror responsible for the deaths of millions of American Indians. Why do we have such different views of Columbus?
At dawn on a small Caribbean island, a group of Taino people watched from a distance as strange men began to come ashore, fhe strangers had arrived on three large ships with cloth sails, These ships were very different from the canoes used by the Taino. The men looked very different from the Taino, too. They had white skin, and hair on their faces. They wore clothes and spoke a strange language, lhe men gathered on the beach and planted flags in the sand.
The date was October 12, 1492. Columbus and his men had just taken their first steps on North American soil. What did the Taino think when they saw these strangers? Were they amazed, or excited, or afraid? We will never know. The Taino had no written language, so they could not record their thoughts. Their views have been lost to history.
Columbus did leave a record of this first encounter, though. He kept a ship’s log, or diary, of his travels. Of this first meeting with American Indians, he wrote,
No sooner had we concluded the formalities of taking possession of the island than people began to come to the beach .. . Ihey are very well-built people, with handsome bodies and very fine faces
I want the natives to develop a friendly attitude toward us...
I therefore gave red caps to some and glass beads to others, 'they hung the beads around their necks, along with some other things of slight value that I gave them. And they took great pleasure in this and became so friendly that it was a marvel. Ihey traded and gave everything they had with good will, but it seems to me that they have very little and are poor in everything. I warned my men to take nothing from the people without giving some-thing in exchange.
Liit- ouurces oay
Most of what we know about Columbus is based on a lew pruna, sources from the His log is one of those sources. I, tells abc Columbus s first voyage, from Spain to the Americas. I, describe islands he visited and the people he found there. I, also explain,
42 Chapter 2
purpose for making the voyage. He wanted to find a new route to the East Indies that would give Spain access to the spice trade with Asia. Along the way, he also hoped to claim new lands for Spain and to spread the Catholic faith.
In his log, Columbus portrays himself as a thoughtful man who cared about the native peoples he met. But the log also shows that he was driven by the search for gold and other riches. Moving from one island to the next, he wrote, “I do not wish to delay, but to discover and go to many islands to find gold.” Finding gold would help justify his voyage and bring wealth and glory to Spain.
The quest for riches had disastrous effects on the native population, however. The Spanish colonists enslaved native peoples and made them work in mines and on farms. As the first governor of the West Indies, Columbus began this policy. In the years that followed, millions of American Indians died from overwork, violence, and disease.
This dark history is the subject of another primary source, The Devastation of the Indies: A Brief Account. The author was Bartolome de Las Casas (bahr-taw-law-MEY day las KA-sas), who came to the West Indies as a colonist in 1502. Like most colonists, he hoped to make his fortune in the Indies. But what he saw there changed his mind.
He became a priest instead and spoke out against the cruelty of Spanish rule. He accused the colonists of acting like “wild beasts” who took pleasure in “killing ..., torturing, and destroying the native peoples.” The reason for the Spaniards’ actions, he wrote, was their “greed and ambition, the greatest ever seen in the world.” Las Casas admired Columbus in many ways and did not blame him for all the harm done to the Indians. But he recognized that Columbus had helped set these events in motion.
How Historians Use the Sources
Historians rely on primary sources like Columbus’s log and the writings of Las Casas. They use these sources and other evidence to write a story of the past. But the stories
they tell depend on how they interpret this evidence.
For many years, the story of Columbus was mostly positive. He was seen as a man of vision who discovered new lands and expanded European knowledge of the world. In recent years, however, views of Columbus have grown more negative.
One of the first accounts of Columbus as a hero was by Washington Irving. In the early 1800s, Irving went to Spain to research the explorer’s life. In 1828, he wrote The Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus.
Las Casas (top) copied Columbus's log, preserving itfor history. His own book told a very different story of the encounter between Spanish and Indians. As this 16th-century drawing (bottom) shows, the Spanish burned or hung Indians who resisted them.
European Exploration and Settlement 43
Many paintings, like this one, portray Columbus and his crew as noble heroes This 19th-century painting has hung in the U.S. Capitol building since 1847.
In this book, Irving described Columbus as a man of “great and inventive genius” whose ambition was “lofty and noble.” Irving admitted that Columbus took actions that brought harm to native peoples. But he excused those actions as “errors of the times.”
Over a century later, the historian Samuel Eliot Morison offered a more balanced view of Columbus. He portrayed Columbus as a real person with strengths and weaknesses. But he argued that his strengths outweighed his flaws. Above all, Morison pointed to Columbus’s skill as a sea captain: “There was no flaw, no dark side to the most outstanding ... of all his qualities—his seamanship. As a master mariner and navigator, Columbus was supreme in his generation.” In Morison’s view,
the whole history of the Americas” began with Columbus’s voyages.
More recently, some historians have offered more critical views of Columbus. One of these writers is Howard Zinn. In his 2003 book A Peoples History of the United States, he focused on the harsh treatment of native peoples by the Spanish. Columbus’s trip to the Americas was not a “heroic adventure,” Zinn wrote, but the start of a “European invasion. It began a history of “conquest, slavery, and death.” Zinn did not deny the importance of Columbus and his achievement. But he emphasized the negative impact.
44 Chapter 2
Why History Varies
Why do historians present such different views of Columbus? The answer has to do with the writing of history. Historians look at the past from different perspectives. In addition, historians must use their judgment in analyzing sources and selecting information. In the process, they are also influenced by their own views and the attitudes of their time.
Irving, for example, wrote his biography of Columbus when the United States was still a young nation. The country was growing and expanding. Irving wanted to inspire his readers with a story of a hero who had great adventures and overcame great obstacles. In Irving s account, Columbus could be seen as an ideal role model for Americans building a new nation.
Morison, on the other hand, wanted to present a more realistic view of Columbus. He portrayed him not as a mythic hero, but as a man with both good and bad qualities. His main goal was to show that Columbus was a brilliant sea captain who changed the course of history.
Zinn had a different idea. He wanted to show the history of Columbus and the Spanish conquest from the point of view of native peoples. He believed that the fate of the Indians had been ignored in the making of the Columbus legend. He wanted people to understand that there was another side to the story.
In fact, the story of the past is always changing, as each new generation adds a new perspective. “Perceptions change, and so does our understanding of the past,” notes writer John Noble Wilford. “Accordingly, the image of Columbus has changed through the years, sometimes as a result of new information but most often because of changes in the lenses through which we view him.” In other words, the stories we tell about the past always reflect what we, in the present, bring to them.
Both pride and protest continue to surround the history of Columbus.
He is honored at celebrations like this Columbus Day parade in New York (left). In Denver (right), protesters blocked marchers at a Columbus Day parade.
European Exploration and Settlement 45
r
