Chapter 16
Life in the West
What were the motives, hardships, and legacies of the groups that moved west in the 1800s?
16.1	Introduction
The vast region that stretches from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean is one of the most extraordinary landscapes on Earth. Tourists come from all over to see its mountains, canyons, deserts, and plains.
To American settlers east of the Mississippi River, this great expanse of grasslands, mountains, and deserts was the West. For all its beauty, the West was a challenging environment. Look at the names that settlers gave to its features. Where else in the United States can you find a mountain range called the Crazies, a scorching desert named Death Valley, a blood-red canyon called Flaming Gorge, or a raging river known as the River of No Return?
Despite its geographic challenges, the West was never empty.
Perhaps as many as 3 million American Indians lived there before Europeans arrived. These first westerners were far more diverse in language and culture than the Europeans who claimed their land.
For most Americans in the early 1800s, however, the West was mostly a blank map. By 1850, it had become the land of opportunity.
The West boasted wide-open spaces and great wealth in timber, gold, silver, and other natural resources. It became a magnet for immigrants and for easterners looking for a new start in life. As Americans began their westward trek, they created new markets for eastern merchants.
In time, the West changed the nation’s economy and politics. It also created folklore of “rugged individualism” that has become a lasting part of American culture.
Newspaperman Horace Greeley captured the growing enthusiasm for “going west” when he wrote, “If you have no family or friends to aid you, and no prospect [opportunity] opened to you ... turn your face to the Great West, and there build up a home and fortune.” In this chapter, you will learn about eight groups of people who turned their faces to the West in the first half of the 1800s. You will learn about their motives for heading West, the hardships they faced, and the legacies they left behind.
Westward-bound settlers had to cross mountains, deserts, and wide-open spaces in their questfor new opportunities.
< Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way, painted in 1861 by Emanuel Gottlieb Leutze
Life in the West 297
This painting shows members of the Lewis and Clark expedition at Three Forks, Montana. The woman is Sacagawea. To her right are Meriwether Lewis, William Clark, and Clark's slave, York.	16.2 The Explorers In the early 1800s, a number of expeditions set out from the United States to explore the West. The most famous was the Lewis and Clark expedition, which was ordered by President Thomas Jefferson. The major motive behind the expedition was to make friendly contact with Indian groups that might be interested in trade. A second motive was to find the Northwest Passage, a water route across North America that explorers had been seeking ever since Columbus reached the Americas. With the purchase of Louisiana from France in 1803, the expedition gained a third motive—finding out just what the United States had bought.
Lewis and Clark expedition a journey made from 1804 to 1806 by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark to explore the territory gained in the Louisiana Purchase	Up the Missouri River In May 1804, the 45-member expedition left St. Louis, Missouri, in three boats. Jefferson’s private secretary, Meriwether Lewis, and his friend William Clark led the expedition. Its members included soldiers, frontiersmen, and an African American slave named York, who worked for Clark. was hard going from the first day. Rowing upstream against the Missouri River’s strong current left the explorers’ hands blistered and eir muscles sore. Mosquitoes feasted on their sunburned faces. By summer, the explorers had reached Indian country. Most T ™enCa" Ind;ans welcomed the strangers, and York fascinated the w t A 1^ ,ad never seen a black man before. Again and again, wrote Clark m his journal, York allowed his skin to be rubbed with a wet finger prove -that he was	a	. what ,C exp °"ers Lmade camP for the winter near a Mandan village in X % DakO,a'	a Frc"ch	-PPW joined then, named	”	Pc'u'-o|< wife, a Shoshone (shuh-SHOW-nee) wo»" "amedSacagawea (Sah-kuh-j„h.WEE.uh,,	as Ind an„ T	" hJ ™PP'-'-' fro™ her people by another when	SholXX" ShC WOU'd ,ranSlaK fM ,hW
*8 Chapter 16
To the Pacific and Back In the spring of 1805, the explorers set out once more. As they moved up the Missouri River, rapids and waterfalls slowed their progress. When they hauled their boats by land around these obstacles, the thorns of the prickly-pear cactus pierced their feet. Meanwhile, grizzly bears raided their camps. Game became scarce.
By late summer, the explorers could see the Rocky Mountains looming ahead. To cross the mountains before the first snows of winter closed the high passes, they would have to find horses—and soon.
Fortunately, the expedition had reached the land of Sacagawea s childhood. One day, a group of Indians approached. To Sacagawea s great joy, they proved to be Shoshone. Learning that her brother was now a Shoshone chief, Sacagawea persuaded him to provide the explorers with the horses they desperately needed.
Ihe explorers made it over the Rockies, but they were more dead than alive. The Nez Perce (nehz pers), an Indian people living in the Pacific Northwest, saved them from starvation. A grateful Lewis wrote in his journal that the Nez Perce “are the most hospitable, honest, and sincere people that we have met with in our voyage.”
As winter closed in, the explorers reached their final destination, the Pacific Ocean. Clark marked the event by carving on a tree, “William Clark December 3rd 1805 By Land from the U. States.”
The Explorers' Legacy After a wet and hungry winter in Oregon, the explorers headed home. In September 1806, two years and four months after setting out, they returned to St. Louis. Lewis proudly wrote to Jefferson, “In obedience to our orders, we have penetrated the Continent of North America to the Pacific Ocean.”
Lewis and Clark had good reason to be proud. They had not found the Northwest Passage, for it did not exist. But they had traveled some 8,000 miles. They had mapped a route to the Pacific. They had established good relations with western Indians. Most of all, they had brought back priceless information about the West and its peoples.
Other explorers added to this legacy and helped prepare the way for the settlement of the West. In 1806, the same year Lewis and Clark returned to St. Louis, 26-year-old army lieutenant Zebulon Pike set out to explore the southern part of the new Louisiana Territory. Pike and his party traveled up the valley of the Arkansas River into present-day Colorado. There, Pike saw the mountain that today is called Pikes Peak.
Pike went on to explore Spanish territory along the Rio Grande and the Red River. His reports of the wealth of Spanish towns brought many American traders to the Southwest. But Pike was not impressed with the landscape. He called the West the “Great American Desert.”
Another famed explorer, John C. Fremont, helped to correct this image. Nicknamed “the Pathfinder,” Fremont mapped much of the territory between the Mississippi Valley and the Pacific Ocean in the 1840s. His glowing descriptions of a “land of plenty inspired many families to try their luck in the West.
legacy a person’s or a group’s impact on future generations



>7;
Zebulon Pike's published reports of his expedition spurred American interest in the Southwest. Part of his route would become the Santa Fe Trail, which was used by thousands of pioneers.
Life in the West 299
The prosperity and pride of the Californios is evident in this painting of a Spanish landowner with his workers.
16.3 The Californios
If Lewis and Clark had turned south from Oregon after reaching the Pacific, they would have found Spain’s best-kept secret: a sun-drenched land called California.
The California Missions In 1769, a Spanish missionary named Junipero Serra (who-NEE-peh-ro SEHR-ra) led soldiers and priests north from Mexico to California. Serra’s goal was to convert the California Indians to Christianity. To do this, he established a chain of missions that eventually stretched from San Diego to just north of San Francisco. Each mission controlled a huge area of land, as well as the Indians who worked it.
rancho a land grant made by the Mexican government, used mostly for raising cattle and crops
_______D.....- xxxxooivFnaiicd meant wen, me missions were aeaai
to native Californians. Indians were sometimes treated harshly am thousands died of diseases brought to California by the newcomers
Settlers followed the missionaries to California. “We were the p neers of the Pacific coast,” wrote Guadalupe Vallejo, “building puel [towns] and missions while George Washington was carrying on tl war of the Revolution.” To reward soldiers and attract settlers, the Spanish began the practice of making large grants of land.
When Mexico won its independence in 1821, California came under Mexican rule. In 1833, the Mexican government closed the missions. Half of the mission land was supposed to go to Indians. Mexico, however, established its own system of land grants in the Southwest and gave most of California’s mission lands to soldiers settlers. The typical Spanish-speaking Californian, or Californio, w granted a rancho of 50,000 acres or more.
Chapter 16
Life on the Ranchos Life on the ranchos combined hard work and the occasional fiesta, or social gathering. Most families lived in simple adobe houses with dirt floors. The Californios produced almost everything they needed at home. Indian servants did much of the work.
The ranchos were so huge that neighbors lived at least a day’s journey apart. As a result, strangers were always welcome for the news they brought of the outside world. During weddings and fiestas, Californios celebrated with singing, dancing, and brilliant displays of horsemanship.
In the 1830s, cattle ranching became California’s most important industry. Cattle provided hides and tallow (beef fat) that could be traded for imported goods brought by ship. Among the goods that an American sailor named Richard Henry Dana carried to California in his trading ship were teas, coffee, sugars, spices, raisins, molasses, hardware, dishes, tinware, cutlery, clothing, jewelry, and furniture.
Because California was so far from the capital in Mexico City, the Mexican government neglected the territory. Soldiers were not paid, and they took what they needed to survive from the people they were supposed to protect. Officials sent to govern California were often unskilled and sometimes dishonest.
The Californios' Legacy In 1846, the United States captured California as part of the war with Mexico. Before long, Californios were a minority in California.
Still, the Californios left a lasting mark. California is full of Spanish place names such as San Diego, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. Ihe Californios also introduced many of California’s famous crops, such as grapes, olives, and citrus fruits. Most of all, they opened California to the world—and the world soon rushed in.
Mountain men, like the one pictured here, were rugged individualists. They often wore shirts and trousers made from animal hides and had hairthat hung to their shoulders.
16.4 The Mountain Men
The Lewis and Clark expedition stimulated new interest in an old industry: the fur trade. Inspired by the explorers’ reports of finding beaver in the Rockies, a Spanish trader named Manuel Lisa followed their route west. In 1807, Lisa led 42 trappers up the Missouri River.
The next year, he took 350 trappers into the Rockies. For the next 30 years, trappers crisscrossed the West in search of valuable furs.
The Trapper's Life The trappers, who were also called mountain men, lived hard and usually died young. During the spring and fall, they set their traps in icy streams. In July, they traveled to trading posts to swap furs for supplies or gathered for an annual rendezvous, or get-together.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
Life in the West 301
In their search for furs, mountain men established new routes to Oregon and California.
The rendezvous may have been fun, but the trappers’ lives were filled with hazards. Fur thieves, Indians, wolves, and bears attacked them. Mountain man Hugh Glass was mauled by a mother bear that threw chunks of his flesh to her hungry cubs before friends rescued him.
Accidents were common, too. A single misplaced step on a mountain, or a misjudged river rapid, often meant sudden death. Disease also took a heavy toll. When one man
asked for news about a party of trappers, he learned that “some had died by lingering diseases, and others by the fatal [rifle] ball or arrow.” Out of 116 men, he wrote, “there were not more than sixteen alive.”
I

Freedom and Adventure Trappers braved this dangerous way of life because of the freedom and adventure it offered. A good example is Jim Beckwourth, an African American from Virginia who became a fur trapper and explorer. While hunting beaver in the Rockies, Beckwourth was captured by Crow Indians. According to Beckwourth, an old woman identified him as her long-lost son, and he was adopted into the tribe. “What could I do?” he wrote later. “Even if I should deny my Crow origin, they would not believe me.”
Beckwourth lived with the Crow for six years and became a chief. By the time he left the tribe in the 1830s, the fur trade was in decline. Like other mountain men, however, Beckwourth continued his adventurous life as an explorer, army scout, and trader. In 1850, he discovered the lowest pass across the Sierra Nevada range, known today as Beckwourth Pass.
The Mountain Men's Legacy In their search for furs, the mountain men explored most of the West. The routes they pioneered across mountains and deserts became the Oregon and California Trails. Their trading posts turned into supply stations for settlers moving west along those trails.
A surprising number of mountain men left another kind of legacy: personal journals. Their stories still have the power to make us laugh and cry and to wonder how they lived long enough to tell their tales.
■ W ■ w
---_ ....WWIVIIUI ICO
Ever since Lewis and Clark appeared among them, the Nez Perce been friendly toward Americans. In 1831, three Nez Perce travele St. Louis to learn more about the white man’s ways. There, the Nt Perce asked if someone would come west to teach their people thi secrets of the “Black Book,” or Bible.
Chapter 16
Several missionaries answered that call. The best known were Marcus and Narcissa Whitman and Henry and Eliza Spalding. In 1836, the two couples traveled west from St. Louis along the Oregon Trail.
It was a difficult journey. Narcissa described the Rockies as “the most terrible mountains for steepness.” Still, the missionaries arrived safely in Oregon, proving that women could endure the journey west.
Oregon Trail an overland route that stretched about 2,000 miles from Independence, Missouri, to the Columbia River in Oregon
A Difficult Start On reaching Oregon, the group split up. The Spaldings went to work with the Nez Perce. The Whitmans worked among a neighboring group, the Cayuse. Neither couple knew very much about the people they hoped to convert. The result was a difficult start.
After three years, the Spaldings finally made their first converts.
In 1839, Henry baptized two Nez Perce chiefs. A year later, one of the chiefs had his infant son baptized as well. The child would grow up to be the leader best known as Chief Joseph.
The Whitmans were less successful. The Cayuse were far more interested in the whites’ weapons and tools than in their religion.
The couple also offended the Cayuse. They refused to pay for the land they took for their mission or to offer visitors gifts, as was the Indians’ custom. Not a single Cayuse converted to the new faith.
A Pioneer's Paradise Marcus Whitman was far more successful at converting Americans over to the belief that Oregon was a pioneer’s paradise. “It does not concern me so much what is to become of any particular set of Indians,” he wrote. “Our greatest work is ... to aid the white settlement of this country and help to found its religious institutions.”
In 1842, Marcus traveled east on horseback. Along the way, he urged Americans to settle in Oregon.
On his return, he guided a large group of settlers along the Oregon Trail. More settlers soon followed. “The poor Indians are amazed at the overwhelming number of Americans coming into the country,” observed Narcissa. “They seem not to know what to make of it.”
In 1847, measles came west with settlers and swept through the Whitman mission. Marcus treated the sick as best he could. The Cayuse noticed that whites usually recovered, while their own people were dying. Rumors spread that Whitman was giving deadly pills to Indians. Cayuse Indians attacked the mission, killing both Marcus and Narcissa.
In 1836, Marcus and Narcissa Whitman married and set out for Oregon to establish a mission. Here, they are offering prayers for a safe journey.
Life in the West 303
The Missionaries" Legacy Like the Spanish priests in California, American preachers in Oregon hoped their legacy would be large numbers of Christian Indians. In fact, relatively few Indians became Christians. Adany, however, died of the diseases that came west with the missionaries.
The missionaries’ true legacy was to open the West to settlement. In California, Oregon, and other territories, settlers followed in the footsteps of the missionaries.
16.6	The Pioneer Women
Women pioneers shared in the danger and the work of settling the West. Most of these women were wives and mothers, but some were single women with motives of seeking homesteads, husbands, or other new opportunities. Pioneer women not only helped to shape the future of the West, but also earned new status for themselves and for women throughout the United States.
Although pioneer women had to travel 15 to 20 miles a day, they were still expected to take care of household chores when the wagon train stopped for the night.
On the Trail Between 1840 and 1869, about 350,000 people traveled west in covered wagons. Most westward-bound pioneers gathered each spring near Independence, Missouri. There they formed columns of wagons called wagon trains.
The journey west lasted four to six months and covered about 2,000 miles. Wagon space was so limited that pioneers were forced to leave most of the comforts of home behind. When the way became steep, they often had to toss out the few treasures they managed to bring. The Oregon Trail was littered with furniture, china, books, and other cherished objects.
Women were expected to do the work they had done back home, but while traveling 15 to 20 miles a day. They cooked, washed clothes, and
took care of the children. Meals on wheels were simple. “About the only change we have from bread and bacon,” wrote Helen Carpenter, “is to bacon and bread.”
The daily drudgery wore many women down. Lavinia Porter recalled, “I would make a brave effort to be cheerful and patient until the camp work was done. Then starting out ahead of the team and my men folks, when I thought I had gone beyond hearing distance, I would throw myself down on the unfriendly desert and give way like a child to sobs and tears.”
Trail Hazards The death toll on the trail was high. Disease was the worst killer. Accidents were also common. People drowned crossing rivers. Indian attacks were rare, but the prospect of them added to the sense of danger.
Chapter 16
By the end of the journey, each woman had a story to tell. Some had seen buffalo stampedes and prairie fires on the Great Plains. Some had almost frozen to death in the mountains or died of thirst in the deserts. But most survived to build new lives in the West.
One group of pioneer women—African Americans who had escaped from slave states or who were brought west by their owners— faced a unique danger. Even though slavery was outlawed in most of the West, bounty hunters were often able to track down fugitive slaves. But for some African American women, the move west brought freedom. For example, when Biddy Mason’s owner tried to take her from California (a free state) to Texas, Mason sued for her freedom and won. She moved to Los Angeles, where she became a well-known pioneer and community leader.
Before setting out on the trail, pioneers who were headed west met in the spring to form groups called wagon trains.
The Pioneer Women's Legacy The journey west changed pioneer women. The hardships of the trail brought out strengths and abilities they did not know they possessed. “I felt a secret joy,” declared one Oregon pioneer, “in being able to have the power that sets things going.
Women did set things going. Wherever they settled, schools, churches, libraries, literary societies, and charitable groups soon blossomed. Annie Bidwell, for example, left behind a remarkable legacy. When Annie married John Bidwell, she moved to his ranch in what is now the town of Chico, California. There she taught sewing to local Indian women and helped their children learn to read and write English. Annie convinced John to give up drinking—he closed the tavern that had been part of his home—and encouraged the building of Chico s first church.
Life in the West 305
Mormons members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, founded by Joseph Smith in 1830
Annie was active in other causes as well, including the movement to give women a right that had long been denied them in the East: the right to vote. Wyoming Territory led the way by granting women the right to vote in 1869. By 1900, a full 20 years before women across the nation would win the right to vote, women were voting in four western states. The freedom and sense of equality enjoyed by women in the West helped pave the way for more equal treatment of women throughout the United States. This was perhaps the greatest legacy of the women pioneers.
16.7	The Mormons
In 1846, a wagon train of pioneers headed west in search of a new home. Looking down on the shining surface of Great Salt Lake in what is now Utah, their leader, Brigham Young, declared, “This is the place!”
It was not a promising spot. One pioneer described the valley as a “broad and barren plain ... blistering in the rays of the midsummer sun.” A woman wrote, “Weak and weary as I am, I would rather go a thousand miles further than remain.” But that was one of the valley’s attractions. No one else wanted the place that Brigham Young claimed for his followers, the Mormons.
A Persecuted Group The Mormons were members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Joseph Smith had founded this church in New York in 1830. Smith taught that he had received a sacred book, The Book of Mormon, from an angel. He believed it was his task to create a community of believers who would serve God faithfully.
Smith’s followers lived in close communities, working hard and sharing their goods. Yet, wherever they settled—first New York, then Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois—their neighbors persecuted them.
Many people were offended by the Mormons’ teachings, especially their acceptance of polygamy—the practice of having more than one wife. Others resented the Mormons’ rapidly growing power and wealth. In 1844, resentment turned to violence when a mob in Illinois killed Joseph Smith.
After Smith s death, Brigham Young took over as leader of the Mormons. Young decided to move his community to Utah. There, the Mormons might be left alone to follow their faith in peace.
West to Utah Young turned out to be a practical as well as a religious leader. Prayer is good,” he said, “but when baked potatoes and pudding and milk are needed, prayer will not supply their place.”
Young carefully planned every detail of the trek to Utah. The pioneers he led west stopped along the way to build shelters and plant crops for those who would follow.
Even with all this planning, the journey was difficult. “We soon thought it unusual,” wrote one Mormon, “to leave a campground without burying one or more persons.”
06 Chapter 16
When he arrived at Great Salt Lake, Young laid out his first settlement, Salt Lake City. By the time he died in 1877, Utah had 125,000 Mormons living in 500 settlements.
To survive in this dry country, Mormons had to learn new ways to farm. They built dams, canals, and irrigation ditches to carry precious water from mountain streams to their farms in the valley. With this water, they made the desert bloom.
The Mormons' Legacy The Mormons were the first Americans to settle the Great Basin. They pioneered the farming methods adopted by later settlers of this dry region. They also helped settlers make their way west. Salt Lake City quickly became an important stop for travelers in need of food and supplies.
To the Mormons, however, their greatest legacy was the faith they planted so firmly in the Utah desert. From its center in Salt Lake City, the Mormon church has grown into a worldwide religion with more than 11 million members.
When Mormons were unable to purchase wagons or oxen for the journey to Utah, they pulled their belongings in handcarts.
Life in the West 307
forty-niners the people who joined the rush for gold in California in 1849
16.8	The Forty-Niners
In 1848, a carpenter named James Marshall was building a sawmill on the American River in northern California. Suddenly, he spotted something shining in the water. “I reached my hand down and picked it up,” he wrote later. “It made my heart thump, for I felt certain it was gold,”
When word of Marshall’s discovery leaked out, people across California dropped everything to race to the goldfields. “All were off to the mines,” wrote a minister, “some on horses, some on carts, and some on crutches.”
The search for gold was difficult. Miners spent long days searching through the mud and stones of freezing streams for this precious metal.
The World Rushes In By 1849, tens of thousands of gold seekers from around the world had joined the California gold rush. About two-thirds of these forty-niners were Americans. The motive of fortune also brought settlers from Mexico, South America, Europe, Australia, and even China.
The forty-niners’ first challenge was simply getting to California. From China and Australia, they had to brave the rough crossing of the Pacific Ocean. From the East, many traveled by ship to Panama in Central America, crossed through dangerous jungles to the Pacific side, and boarded ships north to San Francisco. Others made the difficult journey overland.
Most forty-niners were young, and almost all were men. When Luzena Wilson arrived in Sacramento with her family, a miner offered her $5 for her biscuits just to have “bread made by a woman.” When she
hesitated, he doubled his offer. “Women were scarce in those days,” she wrote. “I lived six months in Sacramento and saw only two.”
Life in the Mining Camps Wherever gold was spotted, mining camps with names like Mad Mule Gulch and You Bet popped up overnight. At Coyote Diggings, Luzena found “a row of canvas tents.” A few months later, “there were two thousand men ... and the streets were lined with drinking saloons and gambling tables.” Merchants made fortunes selling eggs for $6 a dozen and flour for $400 a barrel.
With no police to keep order, the camps were rough places. Miners frequently fought over the boundaries of their claims, and they took it on themselves to punish crimes. “In the short space of twenty-four hours,” wrote Louise Clappe,
“we have had murders, fearful accidents, bloody deaths, a mob, whippings, a hanging, an attempt at suicide, and a fatal duel.”
Digging for gold was hard and tedious work. The miners spent long days digging up mud, dirt, and stones while standing knee-deep in icy streams. All too soon, the easy-to-find gold
Miners shoveled gravel into a narrow box called a sluice. The water running through washed away the lighter particles, and the gold remained.
was gone. “The day for quick fortune-making is over,” wrote a miner in 1851. “There are thousands of men now in California who would gladly go home if they had the money.”
The Forty-Niners' Legacy By 1852, the gold rush was over. While it lasted, about 250,000 people flooded into California. For California’s Indians, the legacy of this invasion was dreadful. Between 1848 and 1870, warfare and disease reduced their number from about 150,000 to just 30,000. In addition, many Californios lost their land to the newcomers.
The forty-niners also left a prosperous legacy. By 1850, California had enough people to become the first state in the far west. These new Californians helped to transform the Golden State into a diverse land of economic opportunity.
16.9	The Chinese
Gam Saan, or “Gold Mountain,” was what people in China called California in 1848. To poor and hungry Chinese peasants, Gam Saan sounded like a paradise. There, they were told, You will have great pay, large houses, and food and clothing of the finest description ... Money is in great plenty.”
By 1852, more than 20,000 Chinese had ventured across the Pacific to California. That year, one of every ten Californians was Chinese.
Life in the West 309

Thousands of Chinese left their homeland and flocked to the California goldfields. Most failed to strike it rich. However, many settled in California's Central Valley, where their knowledge of farming helped the area develop.
An Uncertain Welcome At first, the Chinese were welcomed. Lai Chun-Chuen, an early immigrant, observed that they “were received like guests” and “greeted with favor.” In 1852, the governor of California praised Chinese immigrants as “one of the most worthy classes of our newly adopted citizens.”
As gold mining became more difficult, however, attitudes toward immigrants began to change. A miner from Chile complained, “The Yankee regarded every man but... an American as an interloper [intruder] who had no right to come to California and pick up the gold.” The Chinese, too, came under attack.
American miners called on the government to drive foreigners out of the goldfields. In 1852, the state legislature passed a law requiring foreign miners to pay a monthly fee for a license to mine. As the tax collectors arrived in the camps, most of the foreigners left. One traveler saw them scattered along the roads in every direction,’ life refugees fleeing an invading army.
. nc viunese Stay The Chinese, however, paid the tax and staye on. When the miners’ tax failed to drive off the Chinese, American tried to force them into leaving. Whites hacked off the long queues (kyus), or braids, worn by Chinese men. They burned the shacks o Chinese miners. Beatings followed burnings.
Discouraged Chinese immigrants left the mines to open restau rants, laundries, and stores in California’s growing cities. The eating houses in San Francisco,” one miner wrote, were those opcn( by the Chinese. So many Chinese settled in San Francisco that loca newspapers called their neighborhood Chinatown. Today, San Fran
cisco’s Chinatown remains the oldest and largest Chinese conunufl in the United States.
310
:er 16
Other Chinese put their farming skills to work in California’s fertile Central Valley. They drained swamps and dug irrigation ditches to water arid fields. In time, they would help transform California into America’s fruit basket and salad bowl.
The Legacy of the Chinese Immigrants Most of the Chinese who came to California in search of gold hoped to return to China as rich men. A few did just that. Most, however, stayed on in the United States. Despite continued prejudice against them, their hard work, energy, and skills greatly benefited California and other western states. “In mining, farming, in factories and in the labor generally of California,” observed a writer in 1876, “the employment of the Chinese has been found most desirable.”
The Chinese not only helped to build the West, but they also made it a more interesting place to live. Wherever they settled, Chinese immigrants brought with them the arts, tastes, scents, and sounds of one of the world’s oldest and richest cultures.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the people who settled the West in the 1800s.
The Explorers Explorers Meriwether Lewis and William Clark went west to find the Northwest Passage and to establish friendly relations with native people. The expedition helped prepare the way for future settlement.
The Californios In California, Spanish-speaking settlers followed in the footsteps of missionaries. The Californios’ way of life centered on the rancho and the raising of cattle.
The Mountain Men Valuable beaver furs—and a life of freedom and adventure—attracted fur trappers to the West. Many of these hardy mountain men stayed on as scouts, guides, and traders.
The Missionaries People traveled to Oregon and other western territories in hopes of converting Indians to Christianity. Although they made few converts, the missionaries attracted other settlers to the West.
The Pioneer Women Many women pioneers sought new opportunities in the West. Besides working to establish homes and farms, women often brought education and culture to new settlements.
The Mormons Mormon pioneers traveled to Utah in search of religious freedom. They built cities and towns and introduced new methods of farming to the dry plains.
The Forty-Niners Gold seekers from all over the world rushed to California in 1849. Few became rich, but many stayed to help build the new state s economy.
The Chinese The gold rush attracted thousands of Chinese immigrants to California. Although they often had to fight prejudice, most of them remained in the United States, working as laborers and starting new businesses and farms.
Life in the West 311
Reading Further
Much of California's gold was mined from streams and rivers. But the mining was not easy or pleasant work, as this painting seems to show, and miners were not all white men.
Gold Rush Pioneers
During the gold rush of 1849, thousands of fortune seekers flocked to California. Most of them were white American men, but not all. Women, African Americans, Californios, and people from around the world also caught gold fever." They all dreamed of riches and a better life. What they found in California rarely lived up to their dreams. But through hard work, they helped build a new state.
Luzena Wilson and her husband, Mason, were living on a farm in Missouri when they heard about the discovery of gold in California. “The gold excitement spread like wildfire, even out to our log cabin in the prairie,” she later recalled.
As we had almost nothing to lose, and we might gain a fortune, we early caught the fever. My husband grew enthusiastic and wanted to start immediately, but I would not be left behind. I thought where he could go I could, and where I went I could take my two little toddling babies ... I little realized then the task I had undertaken. If I had, I think I should still be in my log cabin in Missouri. But... it sounded like such a small task to go out to California, and once there fortune, of course, would come to us.

i
The Wilsons packed up their wagon and traveled overland to Sacramento, California, arriving in September 1849. There, they sold their oxen and bought a share in a hotel business. With Luzena as cook and manager, they soon prospered. But over the next few years, their fortunes would rise and fall and rise again.
After a few months, a severe flood swamped Sacramento and wiped out the Wilsons’s business. They decided to move to the mining town of Nevada City and start again. The town was rich from gold strikes. Everybody had money, and everybody spent it,” Luzena recalled. Money ran through one’s fingers like water through a sieve.
She started cooking meals for miners and they soon opened another hotel, the El Dorado. Before long, their business was booming.	!
In March 1851, disaster struck. A fire raged through Nevada City and burned much of the town, including the El Dorado. Once again, the Wilsons lost nearly everything. They were still determined to succeed, however. They moved to a valley west of Sacramento. There, they farmed hay for livestock and started another hotel.
They prospered again, and this time their fortune lasted. Their business was on the road from Sacramento to San Francisco. Other settlers came and put down roots. Before long, the town of Vacaville was born, j Luzena Wilson and her husband remained there for the rest of their lives. They had not struck it rich, but they had built a life in California-

!12 Chapter 16
An Irish Immigrant's Story
Thomas Kerr also found life in California a challenge. Unlike the Wilsons, he never enjoyed much success. In fact, he never even made it to the gold country.
Kerr left his native Ireland during the great famine of 1845-1850. A disease had destroyed the Irish potato crop, causing hunger, hardship, and death. Along with many other Irish, Kerr decided to try his luck in America. He said goodbye to his wife and child and sailed to San Francisco, arriving in March 1850.
Kerr tried to earn money to pay his passage to the goldfields. But work was hard to find in San Francisco, and costs were high. He eventually got a job building a house near Sacramento. That was as close as he would get to the gold country.
The job paid very little. In addition, the work was hard and the conditions were tough. Kerr wrote in his journal, “God knows any money a man earns in Calafornia, its dearly won, for he deprives himself of all the comforts ... in addition to being burned up with a scurching sun . .. and eaten alive by Muskeatoes [mosquitoes].”
Kerr returned to San Francisco, where his wife and child joined him in 1852. He continued to get odd jobs, ending up in the grocery business. But he never made the fortune he imagined. “People may talk ... about the Gold of Calafornia,” he wrote, “but its very difficult to obtain it.”
Women were rare in gold rush towns— and even rarer in the goldfields. Some cooked meals and washed clothes for miners. In return, the miners paid them well and treated them with respect.
A Chilean Migrant's Tale
Many other foreigners also came to California hoping to strike it rich, Among these immigrants were approximately 7,000 Chileans. Many had already worked as miners in Chile. One of these men was Vicente Perez Rosales.
Perez came from a wealthy, landowning family that had lost its fortune in the 1820s. He had tried his hand at various jobs since then, including gold mining and cattle ranching, with little success. Then he learned of the gold strikes in California. Late in 1848, he left Chile with several partners on a ship bound for San Francisco.
Perez was not confident that his group would find gold, but he did believe they could profit from the gold rush. “We felt sure only a lazy man could fail to make money,” he wrote in his journal, “and we were willing to work hard. But little did we know what we faced.”
Perez and his party soon headed for the gold country. They worked at various gold diggings and had some success, but not enough to justify their efforts. “There was plenty of gold,” Perez wrote, “but not enough for all the men in California looking for it.” Competition for gold claims was fierce, and violence often broke out. Much of this violence was directed at foreign miners, particularly Mexicans, Chileans, and Chinese. Eventually, Perez and his party fled the goldfields.
Seeking another way to earn a living, they set up a stand on a street in Sacramento and sold such goods as cheese, peaches, and beef jerky. But an epidemic of disease struck the city, and once again they had to flee. Perez recalled,
Almost overnight, the gold rush changed San Francisco from a sleepy village into a bustling city. Money flowed freely to those who were skilled at running businesses. Banking, trade, and investment flourished.
We had been miners and had failed at that. . . Then we had become merchants, and... that too, as they say, came tumbling down. We had begun to think that, with our luck, if we started a hat factory we could expect men would be born without heads!
—Vicente Perez Rosales, Diary of a Journey to California, 1848-1849
After that, Perez started, a restaurant in San Francisco.
But after initial success, that failed too. He and his partners had already decided to return to Chile in late 1850 when a fire broke out in San Francisco and burned down their building.
They barely escaped with their lives. Two months later, they were back in Chile.
A Black Forty-Niner's Success
Although the gold rush did not pan out for many forty-niners, some did find gold and achieve their dreams. This was the case for hundreds of enslaved African Americans who came west to work in the goldfields and managed to win their freedom.
Among these black miners, Alvin Coffey stands out as a particular success. In April 1849, he set out from Missouri with his owner, Dr. Bassett, who put him to work digging for gold. In his memoirs, Coffey recalled, “We dug and dug to the first of November. At night it commenced raining, and rained and snowed pretty much all the winter. We had a tent but it barely kept us all dry.”
By the next year, Coffey had dug up $5,000 in gold. Bassett kept the money and took Coffey back to Missouri, where he sold him to another man. The new owner was kinder, however. He agreed to let Coffey buy his way to freedom. In 1854, Coffey returned to California and earned $7,000 in the goldfields, enough to free himself and his family.
Coffey settled down in northern California and became a prosperous farmer. His children and grandchildren prospered, too. For Alvin Coffey, the gold rush had lived up to its promise.
The Results for California
The gold rush also brought statehood to California. Vicente Perez Rosales was there to witness the election of the new California legislature. He saw parades, campaign speeches, and even fistfights between rival candidates. Overall, though, he was impressed by the peaceful nature of the election. “There was no pistol shooting, he recalled. “Arms on that day were silent.” And he went on,
How different it all was from the way these things are handled in other countries. Not only that, but once the election was over all the voters accepted the man elected... They dropped the private preferences to hail the majority's choice, and showed as much enthusiasm ...as if they had contributed to his triumph themselves.
The gold rush had helped lay the foundation for California’s political and economic future. And it appeared, in 1850, that that future would be very bright indeed.
By 1852, when this photograph was taken, more than 2,000 African Americans were living in California. Most lived and worked in the goldfields.
Even today, California's gold rush history is an important part of the state's image. The state's motto, "Eureka"— a Greek word meaning "I have found it" —reflects the excitement of the successful miners.
Life in the West 315
