Chapter 25
The Rise of Industry
Did the benefits of industrialization outweigh the costs?
25.1	Introduction
The tragedy began late in the afternoon on March 25, 1911. The quitting bell had just sounded at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in New York City. Nearly 500 employees, most of them young immigrant women, headed toward the exit. It was Saturday, and they were looking forward to a day off with family and friends.
One woman sniffed the air. Something was burning! Another spotted flames leaping out of a pile of cloth scraps. Before she could react, the wooden table above the fabric was ablaze. From there, the flames jumped to the paper fabric patterns hanging above the table. Flaming bits of paper and fabric whirled around the room, setting other tables on fire.
The room filled with smoke. The air became so hot that it burst the windows. Fresh air poured into the room, sending the flames even higher. The fire started to scorch workers’ clothing and hair.
“I heard somebody cry, ‘Fire!’ I left everything and ran for the door,” recalled one woman. “The door was locked and immediately there was a great jam of girls before it.” She could see at once that “if we couldn’t get out, we would all be roasted alive.
Factories and their dangers were a relatively new part of life in the United States. The Industrial Revolution spread to the United States in the early 1800s. After the Civil War, new inventions and business methods allowed Americans to create industry on a much larger scale than ever before. The nation s new mills and factories produced an amazing assortment of goods that made life better for many. Industrial progress, though, brought not only economic benefits, but also serious social costs. The people who were employed in these new industries often lived and worked in the most miserable, even dangerous, conditions.
In this chapter, you will read the rest of the story of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire. You will also learn about both the benefits and the costs of industrialization.
This photograph, taken around 1910, shows a typical workroom in a sewing factory.
Firefighters could do little to stop the blaze that claimed 146 lives at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire in 1911. Unsafe working conditions contributed to the high death toll
The Rise of Industry
entrepreneur a person who assembles and organizes the resources necessary to produce goods and services. Entrepreneurs are willing and able to take the risks involved in starting and managing a business.
laissez-faire a theory that economies work best when there is minimal involvement from government
The Granger Collection, New York
Industrialization produced a wide range of affordable consumer goods. Giant catalogs like this one offered American families everything from pots and pans to pianos.
25.2	A Nation Transformed
Industrialization clearly brought benefits to some. On March 26,1883, Alva Vanderbilt threw a party to show off her family’s new home in New York City. It was not just a party, it was a grand ball—the most dazzling social event in the city’s history. And it was not just any home. The Vanderbilts had built a mansion in the style of a European castle, complete with medieval furniture, tapestries, and armor.
But then, the Vanderbilts were not just any family. Mrs. Vanderbilt’s husband was William Kissam Vanderbilt, a railroad industrialist. He was the grandson of Cornelius Vanderbilt, who had made a fortune in banking and shipping. The Vanderbilt clan was one of the country’s wealthiest and most powerful families.
More than 1,200 of New York’s social elite flocked to Mrs. Vanderbilt’s ball, dressed in glittering costumes. Many of the guests came as kings and queens. But Mrs. Vanderbilt’s sister-in-law decided to be more modern. She came dressed as the electric light.
Mrs. Vanderbilt’s party reflected the way industrialization was transforming American life in the decades after the Civil War. Cities like New York were booming. Entrepreneurs in banking, commerce, and industry were gaining enormous wealth. Technological marvels like the electric light were changing how Americans lived and worked. But as the workers in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory knew, not everyone benefited from this progress.
The Growth of Big Business Families like the Vanderbilts made huge profits from the growth of big business after the Civil War. Businesses got bigger in part because of new technology and manufacturing practices. They also grew because there was more money to invest in them. Bankers and investors were happy to provide the necessary funds in hopes of earning large returns. Some of the money that fueled industrialization came from the large-scale mining of gold and silver in the West.
Government policies also contributed to the boom in big business. According to the theory of laissez-faire (leh-say-FAIR), economies work best with minimal government involvement. (Laissez-faire is French for to let alone. ) The idea of laissez-faire was that government should not regulate the price or quality of goods, the working conditions of laborers, or the business practices of bankers and industrialists.
Some types of government involvement protected business and industry. Federal, state, and local governments helped business and industry through favorable laws and subsidies, such as the land grants
t25a^roa<^s and farmers. Congress passed higher and higher ese made imported goods more expensive and, therefore, loss
competitive with those produced in the United States.
e usiness boom fed the growth of American cities. For 100 years,
Americans had been going west to seek their fortunes. In 1890, the ensus ureau said that the frontier line no longer existed. This was
490 Chapter 25
the imaginary line on the continent beyond which the country’s population density was less than two persons per square mile. The 1890 census marked the closing of the frontier. The new “land of opportunity” was located in the cities of the Northeast and around the Great Lakes, where factories provided thousands of new jobs.
Outside the cities, even farming was getting to be big business. In the Midwest, commercial farmers used new machinery and techniques to grow crops on a larger scale than ever before. “The wildest dream has become reality,” marveled one writer in 1887. “Nothing is too large for belief Twenty and even thirty thousand acre farms, and a hundred bushels to the acre ... The New West... is a veritable ‘Wonderland.’”
The Gilded Age As businesses got bigger, so did the fortunes of those who owned or invested in them. Between 1860 and 1892, the number of millionaires in the United States grew from 400 to more than 4,000. The newly rich filled their palace-like homes with elaborate decorations and European art and antiques. In 1873, the great American writer Mark Twain dubbed this time of showy wealth “the Gilded Age.” (Gilded means overlaid with gold.)
Twain’s name stuck, but it did not describe the lives of most Americans. While wealthy capitalists lived like royalty, many workers lived in dismal poverty. Those who were immigrants often faced prejudice and discrimination. During business downturns, many workers lost their jobs. People were angry about the relationships between some business owners and politicians that resulted in widespread corruption. As you will learn, these conditions eventually sparked protests and calls for reform.
The Vanderbilts were one of the wealthiest and most powerful families of the Gilded Age. This is the lavishly decorated dining room of their summer home in Newport, Rhode Island.
The Rise of Industry
25.3	Improved Technology
By the 1860s, many of the factors necessary for the rapid industrializa-tion of the United States were already in place. Machines had taken over much of the work once done by hand. Work had moved from homes to factories. Railroads had begun to connect customers and manufacturers with an efficient transportation system.
After the Civil War, new inventions and improved technology prompted the growth of new industries. Some of these innovations, or new ideas, helped businesses to grow and become more efficient. Others made daily life easier for many Americans.
The nation's major steel plants in 1900 were located near or in regions with rich deposits of iron and coal. Railroads shipped ore to mills and finished steel to customers.
The Age of steel Before the Civil War, the nation’s railroads ran on iron rails that wore out quickly. Railroad owners knew that rails made of steel—a mixture of iron, carbon, and sometimes other metals—were stronger and would last longer. Steel, however, was difficult and costly to make.
In 1872, a Scottish immigrant named Andrew Carnegie went to England to study a less expensive method of making steel, a method invented by Henry Bessemer. Carnegie owned a company that made iron bridges for railroads. He knew that his bridges would be better if they were made of steel. Carnegie was so impressed by the Bessemer process that he brought it back to the United States. “The day of iron has passed,” he announced. “Steel is king!”
Carnegie was right. Within a decade, steel was replacing iron in rails, locomotives, and bridges. Other industries took advantage of steel, which was less expensive than iron. Steel nails, needles, and knives became common household items.
Many steel companies competed fiercely to supply steel for such products. To remain the leader, Carnegie hired scientists to improve the quality of his company’s steel. He employed good managers to make his steel mill run efficiently. His recipe for success was “adopt every improvement, have the best machinery, and know the most.
To keep costs low, Carnegie set out to control every step in the steelmaking process. He purchased iron mines to supply his ore, coalfields to fire his furnaces, and railroads to ship his finished steel to customers.
To reduce his competition, Carnegie also bought up several
492 Chapter 25
rival steel companies. He then combined them all to form the giant Carnegie Steel Company. By 1900, Carnegie Steel produced a quarter of the nations steel.
Electric Power In 1876, Thomas Edison opened an “invention factory” in New Jersey. With a team of workers, he set out to create a “minor” invention every ten days and a major one “every six months or so.”
Edison succeeded brilliantly. More than any other inventor, he helped turn electricity into an everyday source of light and power.
His workshop turned out the first practical electric lightbulb, the phonograph (record player), the motion picture projector, and many other inventions.
In 1882, Edison built the first electrical power station and distribution system in New York City. His team invented everything the system required, including generators, regulators, meters, switches, light sockets, fuse boxes, and underground electric cables. When he finally turned the generator on, electricity began to flow to homes, stores, and factories. The age of electricity had begun.
By 1900, some 25 million lightbulbs were glowing across the country. Many factories were replacing waterwheels and steam engines with electric motors. Streetcars powered by electricity carried workers and shoppers along city streets. New electric-powered devices, such as washing machines and vacuum cleaners, were making housework easier.
1 of the New-York Historical Society, negative #2946.
Thomas Edison's invention of the light-bulb transformed the nation and gave birth to the age of electricity. In this picture of New York in the late 1880s, electric lines formed a crisscross canopy over the street. At night, these buildings glowed with electric light.
The Rise of Industry
mass production the use of
interchangeable parts and assembly lines to make large quantities of identical goods
The Telephone The telephone was invented by a Scottish immigrant, Alexander Graham Bell. In 1876, as he was getting ready to test his “talking machine,” Bell spilled acid on himself. “Watson-come here___i want to see you,” he commanded his assistant. Thomas Wat-
son, who was in another room, heard every word over Bell’s telephone.
Bell’s invention worked so well that, by 1915, Americans were communicating with one another over 9 million telephones. All these telephones made American industry more efficient and competitive by allowing producers, sellers, and customers to communicate quickly and easily.
New Production Methods New methods of organizing work were also making businesses more efficient. Factory owners adopted Eli Whitney’s idea of assembling a wide variety of products from interchangeable parts. They also used the assembly line. In a shoe factory, for example, one worker operated a heel-cutting machine. Another operated a sole-cutting machine. Another made shoelaces. Still other workers assembled, labeled, and packaged the shoes.
Henry Ford was one person who foresaw the great potential in the assembly line. Ford created a moving assembly line to mass-produce automobiles. In Ford plants, workers stood in place all day, while a conveyor brought the work to them. After each worker did one or two tasks, the belt moved the product to the next worker’s station.
These techniques of mass production enabled workers to produce more goods per day at a lower cost. As prices dropped, more Americans could afford to buy manufactured products. More customers meant more factories. By 1900, almost four times as many Americans worked in factories as had a generation earlier.
The Triangle Factory Mass Production in New York
The Triangle Shirtwaist Factory was just one of many new businesses that took advantage of improved technology to mass-produce a quality product at a good price. The Triangle Factory specialized in a style of women’s blouse known as a shirtwaist. A shirtwaist had puffy sleeves, a neat collar, front buttons, and a snug waist. Women liked shirtwaists so much that by 1909, New York
City had more than 500 factories that made only this style of blouses.
Sam Bernstein, the production manager at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory, loved watching his workers use the newest tools and production methods. Each person at the cutting tables had a special steel knife. This knife could slice through many layers of fabric at a time. This meant that
a worker could cut dozens of sleeves, fronts, and backs at one time.
On another floor of the building, Bernstein could hear the whirring of 240 sewing machines. The machines were neatly laid out in 16 tightly packed rows. Flexible belts connected each machine to a rotating axle running down each row just above the floor. This axle, which was spun by an electric motor, delivered power to the machines. The machines clattered loudly as
494 Chapter 25
Lying flat on the lower wing of the 1903 Wright flyer, Orville Wright begins the first successful airplane flight in history as his brother Wilbur runs alongside during takeoff. The Wright brothers designed and built the flyer out of wood and cloth. Itwas powered by a gasoline engine of the Wrights' own design.
Air Transport While Henry Ford was turning out cars on the assembly line, brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright were experimenting with flying. In 1903, with his brother Wilbur running alongside, Orville successfully piloted the first “flying machine” in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Although the flight was only 12 seconds in duration, it sparked worldwide interest in flying.
By the late 1920s, an industry based on air travel had emerged. The U.S. postal service used planes to transport mail across the country while the military used planes for exploration and scouting. At the same time, wealthy Americans took their first commercial flights across the country.
women sewed the pieces of shirtwaists together.
Piles of finished blouses were then lifted to the floor above by electric freight elevators. There, two rows of workers gave the shirtwaists a final pressing. Finally, shipping clerks packed the shirtwaists into boxes for shipment.
Usually, the factory almost ran itself. But if a problem occurred, the company’s switchboard operator could reach Bernstein by telephone on any of the factory’s three floors.
The Rise of Industry
corporation a business that is owned by many investors
trust a group of corporations that unite in order to reduce competition and control prices in a business or an industry
monopoly a company that controls all production and sales of a particular product or service
In 1901, J. P. Morgan bought Carnegie's steel company and turned it into U.S. Steel, the nation's first billion-dollar corporation.
25.4	The Rise of Big Business
When Andrew Carnegie opened his first factory in 1865, most businesses were still owned by one person or a few partners. Because the owners’ funds were limited, businesses were small. Owners knew their employees and often treated them like family.
Growth of Corporations A partnership might work well for a garment, or clothing, factory. But big businesses, such as railroads, needed much more capital (money to start a business) than a few partners could provide. To raise larger sums of money, entrepreneurs set up corporations. A corporation is a business that is owned by many investors, or people who help pay the business’s initial expenses.
A corporation raises funds by selling stock, or shares in a business. Investors who buy the stock are known as stockholders. In return for their investment, stockholders hope to receive dividends, or a share of the corporation’s profits.
The money invested by the stockholders is used to build the business. To make sure their money is used properly, stockholders electa board of directors. The people on the board of directors oversee the running of the corporation.
After the Civil War, corporations attracted large amounts of money from investors. By the 1880s, thousands of corporations were doing business across the United States.
iiuvacicncr wii irusi a giant in the oil business, John u. ko< efeller introduced another form of business organization, thetrus A trust is a group of corporations run by a single board of directo
Rockefeller invested in his first oil refinery in 1862, at the age o
At that time, petroleum, or oil found underground, was just becor a valuable resource. Oil refineries purify petroleum into fuel oil. E ing the 19th century, oil was used to light homes, cook food, and r engines and generators.
Before long, many small refineries were competing fiercely in t oil business. The amount of oil these firms produced rose and fell wildly, along with prices. Rockefeller saw this as wasteful and inefl cient. To reduce competition, he did everything he could to drive 1 rivals out of business. Companies he could not destroy, he bought.
Li e Carnegie, Rockefeller took control of every step of his bu: ss. He bought oil fields along with railroads, pipelines, and ship i ROVe iS	his own warehouses and even made his c
oi barrels for storing oil products. By 1880, Rockefeller controllec
95 percent of the nation’s oil-refining industry.
tk c? m^na§e hls many businesses, Rockefeller combined them ir ,e an r1 0*1 Trust The trust made the oil industry more effici , » T ' ef°"' Bm’ aS “ moni>Poly. the trust had the power to homes andbus«Wh°	0"
496 Chapter 25
The "people's entrance" to the U.S. Senate is "closed" in this 1889 cartoon According to the cartoonist, the Senate was controlled by business trusts, shown as giant, bloated moneybags.
Following Rockefeller’s example, entrepreneurs created trusts in other businesses such as railroads, meatpacking, sugar, whiskey, and tobacco. The business leaders who controlled these huge trusts became fabulously wealthy Because most had made their fortunes by crushing their competitors, critics called them “robber barons.”
The Evils of Trusts The growth of trusts alarmed many Americans. They saw these monopolies as a threat to the free-enterprise system. This system depends on free competition among businesses to provide the public quality products at fair prices. A monopoly, people argued, has little reason to improve its products or to keep prices low because it has no competition.
People also worried about the influence of trusts on the political process. Wealthy entrepreneurs, they complained, were using their enormous wealth to buy elections and corrupt public officials. As the Chicago Tribune warned, “liberty and monopoly cannot live together.
The Triangle Factory The Owners
The Triangle Shirtwaist Factory would never be the size of U.S. Steel or Standard Oil. However, it was the largest shirtwaist factory in the entire country. The two men who owned the factory, Max Blanck and Isaac Harris, were famous in the garment indus-
try and had been nicknamed “the shirtwaist kings.”
The owners worked well together. While Blanck entertained buyers from stores to convince them to carry Triangle products, Harris ran the factory. Harris kept up with garment production, machinery maintenance, and work flow. He did not, however, try to keep up with his workforce.
The factory had too many workers for him to get to know them all personally.
The shirtwaist business made Blanck and Harris very wealthy. They drove fancy cars and enjoyed comforts that their workers could only dream about. Both had worked hard in a competitive business and probably felt they had earned their success.
The Rise of Industry
25.5	The Growth of Cities
Industrialization brought with it urbanization, or city growth. Most of the nation’s new industries were located in urban areas. Immigrants and rural Americans flocked to these industrial centers looking for jobs. Chicago, for example, more than tripled its population between 1880 and 1900.
Urban Tenements As urban populations increased, demand for cheap housing exploded. To meet this demand, developers threw up cheap apartment buildings called tenements. One person described tenements as “great prison-like structures of brick, with narrow doors and windows,
cramped passages and steep, rickety stairs.” By 1900, about two-thirds of New Yorkers lived in such buildings.
A poor family might occupy just one or two rooms in a tenement, usually with no heat or water. Friends or family often took in newcomers who arrived in cities without money for rent. As a result, tenement neighborhoods were some of the most densely populated areas on Earth.
Tenements were unclean and even dangerous places to live. Only a few rooms had windows to provide light and fresh air. The rest were
This family is shown in a New York City tenement in the early 1900s. Cramped, dirty, dark, and crowded, tenements spread disease and misery among inhabitants.
The Triangle Factory
The Building and the Workers
Blanck and Harris located their thriving shirtwaist business on the top three floors of the ten-story Asch Building in New York City. They chose this space partly because of the morning sunlight that streamed in through the large windows. Their landlord, Joseph Asch, stated that when construction was completed in 1901, “the architects claimed my building was ahead of any other building
of its kind which had previously been constructed.”
It may have been ahead of other buildings, but the Asch Building was far from perfect. It had only two staircases, even though the city building code required three. The city had agreed to count the building’s fire escape as the third staircase. But the fire escape ended at the second floor. Nor was the Asch Building well de-
signed for evacuation during an emergency. Its staircases were narrow. In addition, instead of opening outward to let people escape easily, the building’s doors opened inward. Despite previous scares from several small fires in the building, Asch had not addressed any of these problems.
The Triangle Factory’s workforce was made up primarily of young immigrant women. Most of these women were Italians and Jews from Eastern Europe. Often their
498 Chapter 25
dark and airless. In some tenements, the only source of water was a single faucet in a courtyard. Many lacked sewer services. In such conditions, diseases such as typhoid and cholera spread quickly, killing infants and young children. Fire was another constant worry.
Cities Expand Upward As cities expanded, urban land costs shot up. In New York, land that had sold for $80 in 1804 was selling for $8,000 by 1880. Such prices inspired builders to construct more building space on less land by expanding upward. Using lightweight steel beams to support walls and ceilings, builders constructed skyscrapers that rose ten or more stories into the air. Electric elevators whisked people and freight effortlessly from floor to floor.
Businesspeople rented space in city skyscrapers for their offices and factories. Factory owners preferred the top floors. Rents were cheaper higher up, and the natural light was better, saving owners money on electric lighting. The cost of insurance was low as well because steel buildings were thought to be fireproof. By the early 1900s, more than half of New York City’s workers labored above the seventh floor.
urbanization the growth of cities
City Excitement For all their problems, cities were also exciting places to live. Stores were filled with products never seen by people who had grown up on farms. City dwellers enjoyed all sorts of entertainment, from operas and art museums to dance halls and sporting events. When writer Hamlin Garland came to Chicago with his brother, he found that “Everything interested us . . . Nothing was commonplace; nothing was ugly to us.”
jobs provided their family’s only source of income. Even if these workers had been aware of the building’s safety problems, they would have hesitated to demand improvements for fear of being fired.
Like most factory workers, Triangle employees could afford housing only in crowded slums. T lived in a two-room tenement with my mother and two sisters and the bedroom had no windows,” recalled one employee. There was nothing to look forward to.”
The workers a. the Triangle Shirtwaist Factor, lived in tenements like this one. The, were not paid enough to afford better housing.
Ihe Rise of Industry
This young girl stands between looms in a textile factory. Atthe turn of the century, millions of children worked long hours in mines, mills, and factories.
25.6	Working Conditions
Working conditions in most industries were appalling. Gone were the days when business owners knew and cared about the people who
worked for them. Men like Carnegie and Rockefeller knew little about their workers.
Working Families Gone too were the days when factory workers could expect decent pay. With so many people looking for jobs, business owners could pay low wages. Many wages were so low that men
The Triangle Factory A Hazardous Workplace
Saturday was payday at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory.
Most workers earned only $9 per week, with the most experienced employees making up to $12. The younger workers, some only 13 years old, earned just $6 per week for sewing on buttons all day. The very youngest earned even less. Worker Pauline Newman recalled,
We were young, eight, nine, ten years old.. . The hours were from 7:30 in the morning to 6:30 at night when it wasn't busy.
When the [busy] season was on
we worked until 9 o'clock. No overtime pay, not even supper money . . . My wages were $1.50 for a seven-day week.
These pay rates were what workers earned before deductions. The company charged its employees for the thread and electricity they used, for the chairs they sat on, and even for using Triangle’s coat lockers.
Employees were expected to work at least 59 hours a week. This included every Saturday, plus occasional Sundays. To keep workers from claiming
overtime pay, the managers sometimes set the clock back. To keep workers from being “interrupted,” the heavy steel doors to the hall and stairs were locked until closing time.
To make sure workers didnt steal, the factory built a narrow corridor leading to the elevators. Every day at quitting time, employees filed through this corridor one at a time so that a watchman could inspect each woman’s handbag.
Working at Triangle was unhealthy, uncomfortable, and unsafe. Managers seldom let workers leave to use the bathroom or to drink from the dirty
500 Chapter 25
could not support their families. To get by, wives and children had to work as well, usually at even lower wages.
Most factory women earned about $1 to $3 per day. If business was slow, wages dropped. A boss might not pay a new worker anything until she had learned her job. Then he would charge her for maintaining the sewing machine she worked on. If a worker complained, she could easily be replaced with a new one, perhaps for less money.
Millions of young children worked in mines, mills, and factories.
A newspaper reported that young boys hired by coal miners to separate lumps of coal from rocks “go to work ... at seven o’clock in the morning and work till it is too dark to see any longer. For this they get $1 to $3 a week.” They also got curved spines from bending over piles of coal all day.
Inside the Factories Mills and factories were hot in summer and cold in winter. To keep costs low, owners crowded workers together rather than finding additional space.
Of all workplace dangers, fire claimed the most lives. In New York, tall buildings often lacked fire escapes. New York City’s fire chief wanted buildings to have fire escapes and sprinkler systems that could put out fires quickly. But factory owners objected to such expenses.
New York City did require that factory doors “open outwardly” and “shall not be locked” so workers might escape quickly in a fire. The law was not enforced, however. In 1910, about 94 percent of all factory doors in the city opened inward instead of outward.
tap in the hallway. In the sewing room, women could barely squeeze by each other’s machines without catching their clothes in the moving parts. The chairs often lacked backs to support the sewers while they worked. With all the machines in use, the noise could be deafening.
Fire hazards abounded. The city prohibited smoking, but the factory rarely enforced that rule. Workers stuffed leftover fabric into wooden bins where it sat for months just waiting for a spark to set it ablaze. The building’s only fire protection was a few hundred pails of water scattered throughout its ten floors.
The Rise of Industry
labor union an organization that brings together workers in the same trade, or job, to fight for better wages and working conditions
T
Strikes often pitted police against labor organizers. This painting shows a policeman being shot on Haymarket Square in Chicago during a strike of the Knights of Labor in 1886.

25.7	Labor Unions
As a teenager, Rose Schneiderman found work in a cap factory. After three years, she later wrote, “It began to dawn on me that we girls needed an organization. We were helpless; no one girl dare stand up for anything alone.”
Workers like Schneiderman had been forming unions since the 1830s. These early organizations were labor unions. They organized workers in the same trade, or job, to fight for better wages and working conditions. Sometimes workers in these unions went out on strike, refusing to work until their employers agreed to meet their demands.
The Triangle Factory Fire Ends in Tragedy
About 5,000 workers from the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory were part of the strike of 1909. Their demands included unlocked doors during working hours and safer fire escapes in the Asch Building.
Rather than meet those demands, Blanck and Harris responded by locking the strikers out of the factory and advertising for replacements. “If the union had won, we would have been safe,” said striker Rose Safran. “But the bosses defeated us and we didn’t get the open doors or the better fire escapes.” Because of that defeat, 146 workers would die tragically.
The cause of the fire that swept through the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory in 1911 was never known. But one Saturday afternoon, people on the eighth floor began to cry, “Fire!” Within minutes, the entire floor was a “mass of flames.” Escaping workers rushed to the stairs or pushed their way into the two small elevators. The stairs, however, were soon ablaze, and the elevators stopped running.
On the tenth floor, Mary Alter was warned of the fire by telephone. Owner Isaac Harris and production manager Sam Bernstein led some people out onto the roof. People from nearby buildings stretched
ladders between the rooftops to help those on the roof escape.
Workers on the ninth floor had no warning. The fire just appeared. Some women died immediately. Firemen later found them as “skeletons bending over sewing machines.” Those who had time to escape found themselves trapped by the locked factory door. In desperation, they rushed to the windows and began to jump.
The crowd that gathered outside the Asch Building watched in horror as girls began to fall out of the sky—“ffte streaming back from their hair and dresses”—and drop to their deaths on the pavement below.
Firefighters arrived quickly but had trouble bringing their equipment close to the build-
502 Chapter 25
Knights of Labor In 1869, Uriah Stephens organized a new union known as the Knights of Labor. Stephens hoped to unite “men and women of every craft, creed, and color” into “one common brotherhood.” The Knights led several successful strikes against telegraph and railroad companies. With such victories, the union grew to over 700,000 members.
In 1886, nearly 200,000 workers went on strike nationwide to demand an eight-hour workday. During a rally at Haymarket Square in Chicago, someone threw a bomb at police. The police shot back, injuring many workers. Four workers were sentenced to death for the bombing, even though no evidence tied them to the bomb.
Fearing more violence, employers fired anyone associated with the Knights. Membership dropped quickly, and the organization faded away.
American Federation of Labor As the number of Knights declined, a group of local trade unions formed the American Federation of Labor. Led by Samuel Gompers, the AFL tried to negotiate agreements with employers on such issues as wages.
Despite the AFL’s peaceful approach, many employers made their workers sign pledges not to join unions. They also fired union members and exchanged lists of such “troublemakers” with other employers.
ing because of the bodies on the pavement. There was little the firemen could do, however. Their ladders were not tall enough to reach beyond the sixth floor.
Their safety nets were just as useless. The workers fell with such force, said one fireman, that they “went right through the life nets.”
It was all over in half an hour.
At the funeral for the victims, garment workers marched under a banner proclaiming, “We demand fire protection.” As she marched, Rose Schneiderman glanced up at the buildings lining the funeral procession. “There they were. Girls right at the top of hundreds of buildings, looking down on us,” she recalled. “The structures were no different from the Asch Building ... many We in a far worse condition.
FIRE TRAP VICTIMS BURIED
This New York paper ran Triangle fire nextto a car
ran an eyewitness account of barred doors at the cartoon that demanded "Who Is Responsible?"
The Rise of Industry
Shirtwaist workers display strike leaflets for a newspaper photographer. Strikers wanted shorter hours, higher pay, and safer working conditions.
The Homestead Strike Some business owners used force to defeat unions. When workers struck at a Carnegie steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania, Henry Clay Frick, Carnegie’s partner, refused to talk about their demands. Instead Frick made plans to reopen his plant with non-union workers. To protect these strikebreakers, he hired 300 armed guards.
When the guards arrived in Homestead, they faced an angry crowd of strikers. A battle broke out in which both guards and strikers died. Still, Frick went ahead with his plan. When the Homestead plant reopened with strikebreakers, the union collapsed in defeat.
Working Women Organize
Such tactics kept many women from joining unions, but not Rose Schneiderman. Upset by pay cuts, Schneiderman organized the women in her factory as part of the National Board of United Cloth Hat and Cap Makers. Soon after she joined the union, she wrote,
A strike was declared in five of the biggest factories. There are 30 factories in the city. About 100 girls went out. The result was a victory, which netted us—I mean the girls—$2 increase in our wages on the average . . . But all was not lovely by any means, for the bosses were not at all pleased with their beating and had determined to fight us again.
, gCS women s uni°n was the International Ladies’ Garme] ers Union (ILGWU), which represented women in clothing k
In 1909, thousands of New York City garment workers walke eir jo s to protest poor working conditions and low pay. As th< grew, so did public sympathy for the young women. The news
papers called this movement “Ihe Uprising of the 20,000.”
ended months later when employers agreed to a short
workweek and better pay. They also ended fees for the use of farter, P j r C ernPloyers refused, however, to meet the workers
unsafe f	^mProvements. Most garment factories remainei
504 Chapter 25
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about the rapid industrialization of the United States and how this progress influenced the way average people earned their livings.
A Nation Transformed Rapid industrialization transformed American life in the decades following the Civil War. Entrepreneurs in banking, commerce, and industry amassed enormous wealth. Businesses grew larger in part because of new technologies, new investors, and policies such as laissez-faire. According to this theory, economies work best when governments do not interfere.
Improved Technology New inventions and manufacturing methods prompted the growth of new industries. A less expensive method of making steel made it possible for businesses to grow in size and efficiency. Other inventions, such as the electric light and the telephone, made daily life easier for many Americans.
The Rise of Big Business While new innovations allowed more Americans to afford manufactured items, there was a hidden price. With the rise of big business through corporations, trusts (such as Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Trust), and monopolies, the wealthy got wealthier and the poor got poorer.
Ihe Growth of Cities As cities grew, factories rose ten or more stories above the ground, and people from all over came looking for jobs. People lived in crowded, unclean, and dangerous tenement buildings.
Working Conditions Men, women, and children worked long hours for low wages in crowded, unsafe factories. Doors were kept locked, and workers could not leave their stations without permission. Workers didn t dare speak up for fear of losing their jobs.
Labor Unions By joining labor unions, workers could fight as a group for better wages and working conditions. When organized workers went on strike, factory owners often responded with violence or
by hiring non-union workers. Although labor unions had some successes, many factories remained unsafe.
This political cartoon shows
the women of the Triangle Factory desperately trying to open one of the few exit
doors. A man dressed in a suit
decorated with dollar signs holds the door closed.
The Rise of Industry
Reading Further
Edison suffered a hearing loss as a child. But he turned his disability into an advantage in his career as a telegraph operator. "Unlike other operators/' he said "I was not bothered by the [noise of the] other instruments." His efforts to improve the telegraph led eventually to his invention of the phonograph, a machine that played recorded sound.
The Celebrity Inventor
Thomas Alva Edison was a legend in his own time. In part, his fame came from inventing things that changed peoples lives—things we take for granted today like recorded music, the lightbulb, and movies. Edison was also a legend because he invented his own image. He knew howto get publicity and make himself a star.
From her home in Norton, Kansas, Mrs. W. G. Lathrop felt moved to write a fan letter. The letter wasn’t going to a rock star, a movie star, or a sports hero. It was 1921, and Mrs. Lathrop was writing a fan letter to her favorite inventor, Thomas Edison. “Dear Sir,” she began,
It is not always the privilege of a woman to thank personally the inventor of articles which make life livable for her sex. I feel that it is my duty as well as privilege to tell you how much we women of the small town are indebted to you . . . Positively as I hear my wash machine chugging along... as I write this it does seem as though I am entirely dependent on the fertile brain of one [who is] thousand^ of] miles away for every pleasure and labor saving device I have.
Lathrop then filled in the specifics. She described how Edison’s inventions affected a typical day in her life.
The house is lighted by electricity. I cook on a Westinghouse electric range, wash dishes in an electric dishwasher. An electric fan even helps to distribute the heat over part of the house... I wash clothes with an electric machine and iron on an electric mangle [pressing machine] and with an electric iron. I clean house with electric cleaners. I rest, take an electric massage and curl my hair on an electric iron . .. Then start the Victrola [record player] and ... listen to [music], forgetting that Tm living in a tiny town of two thousand where nothing much ever happens.
It is strange today to think about writing a letter like this one. But Thomas Edison was a celebrity. How did an inventor—someone who worked in a laboratory that was anything but glamorous-become so famous and well loved?
The Invention that Launched the Legend
No one but his mother would have guessed that little Thomas Edison wou d one day become a famous inventor. He was a poor student, w T?7” and distracted- He doodled and didn’t complete his lessons.
a such a hard time at school that after only three months, his mother decided to teach him at home.
506 Chapter 25
When he was 15, Edison learned how to run a telegraph machine. The telegraph used bursts of electric current to send messages quickly over long distances. Edison was fascinated by the machine.
It was while trying to improve the telegraph that Edison made a momentous discovery. He developed a machine that could record and transmit the sound of a human voice. He called it a phonograph.
It is hard to imagine today just how amazing this was. Until the phonograph, people had only heard the voices of those who were physically near them. But Edison had made a machine that could record a voice. The recording could be played when the speaker was nowhere to be seen. It could, in fact, be played long after the speaker had died. The phonograph seemed magical.
Soon, a promoter was traveling the country, demonstrating how the phonograph worked. Audiences were thrilled.
You should hear me bring down the House by singing in the
Phonograph .. . The effect when they hear me is stupendous, but when they hear the Phonograph reproducing my song with all its imperfections they endanger the walls with clamor.
—Edward Johnson, 1878
The New York Sun newspaper ran this headline about Edison and his phonograph on February 22, 1878: “A Man of Thirty One Revolutionizing the Whole World.” Thomas Edison became a celebrity.
Once Edison saw the public’s enthusiasm, he was more than happy to promote the new machine. By mid-1878, he published a list often possible uses for the phonograph. The list included recording books, music, and lectures. Edison also thought the phonograph could be used to teach languages and write letters. Today, we use recordings for all those purposes—and many more that even Edison could never have dreamed up.
The phonograph amazed people around the world. In this advertisement, a smiling Uncle Sam shows off one of the cylinders used to play recorded sound.
Within aboutten years after its invention, the phonograph had become a commercial product. Forthe first time, people could listen—and dance—to recorded music.
"Genius is one percent inspiration and ninety-nine percent perspiration," Edison was fond of saying. His adoring public loved both images: inspired genius and hardworking inventor. In his lab in Menlo Park, New Jersey, Edison worked with assistants for two years to create a successful electric light.
Electricity and the Lightbulb
Edison is most famous today for inventing the electric lightbulb. In fact, other inventors had been working on lightbulbs for 50 years. But it was Edison who solved the problem that had plagued them all: how to make a bulb that would burn for more than just a few minutes.
A lightbulb works by electric current moving through a filament (thread). When the filament gets hot, it gives off light. Other inventors knew this, but they had not been able to figure out what kind of filament to use. After years of trying to use platinum, Edison switched to carbon.
A carbon-coated thread did the trick. It would not melt or catch fire, and it could produce light for hours.
In October 1879, the New York Herald poetically described the light emitted by Edison s bulb. It was “like the mellow sunset of an Italian autumn ... a little globe of sunshine, a veritable Aladdin’s lamp,” reporter Marshall Fox gushed. Better yet, it stayed lit for 13 and a half hours. Previous bulbs had lit up for only a few minutes.
A full year before he so impressed the New York Herald, Edison had announced that making a lightbulb was so simple that “everybody will wonder why they have never thought of it.” Unfortunately, it was not so simple. When Edison made that statement, he was still strug-g ing to get his electric lightbulb to work. But he was happy to keep
i C interested with promises that the light from his bulb would last almost forever.”
At the same time that Edison was working on the lightbulb, he k m ° WOrkin8 on a way to distribute electricity. He planned to
a P°wer plant on Pearl Street in lower Manhattan. The power plan, would Ugh, the whole neighborhood.
, °rC lAfur Car^ $treet P^ant was finished, Edison had a private outfit^ h 1 lam Vanderbilt’ son of the railroad tycoon, wanted to electrical °USe °? Flfth Avenue with electricity. So Edison had an the livhtc P°Wer P ant built in tbe basement. On the chosen evening, until somen™ on as Planned. Everything seemed to be going well-that the wa?' "“'‘a <he °f	burning. It turned out
Mrs V nde hr had	‘hread in „ and had almost caught te
ei«^Xi'	*
and a smail^part of Manl'la''t	Pearl Slr“* 8enera,or s,arted UP
an lit up. But it was not the earth-shattering
508 Chapter 25
event that some books describe. It had taken Edison four years to fulfill his promise of centrally generated electricity. The public had become bored. For his part, Edison was eager to start making money from his years of hard work. He was also ready to cement his reputation as an earth-changing inventor, regardless of how long it took him to follow through on his promises.
An Inventor Who Changed the World
Edison kept his inventions coming. As the 1800s came to a close, he applied himself and his staff to making moving pictures. He called his device a kinetoscope, which means “an instrument for viewing movement.” He promised that it would do “for the Eye what the phonograph does for the Ear.”
As with the phonograph, Edison did not immediately see how much people would like moving pictures. And as with the lightbulb, he was not the only inventor working on the device. Edison faced stiff competition. But in 1897, he starred in his own 30-second moving picture, Mr. Edison at Work in His Chemical Laboratory. The public loved it.
Thomas Edison had indeed changed the world. He invented—and helped invent through his competition with others—the phonograph, the electric lightbulb, the centralized distribution of electricity, the movies, and more. It is nearly impossible to imagine life today without any one of these or the later inventions they led to.
Decades before he died, Edison reached heights of celebrity and fame. The “Man Who Defeated Darkness,” the “Dean of Inventors,” and the “Greatest Citizen of the World” are just some of the titles given to him. He was happy to accept the praise, and people today are happy to accept his inventions.
mUJ

Thomas Edison was a savvy businessman. When he boughtthe rights to another successful projector, he took full credit for its invention and called it the Vitascope. The new movie projector could turn these 45 still pictures of a man sneezing (right) into a five-second moving picture.
e "Wonderful l« The Vlteecope. Pictures life site I I end full of color. Makes e thrilllnB show.	I
■	NEWYORK HERALD, April 24, 96.)
The Rise of Industry
