Chapter 19
The Worlds of North and South
How was life in the North different from life in the South?
19.1	Introduction
Eli Whitney, a young man from Massachusetts, listened politely to the Georgia planters’ complaints. Tobacco prices were low, and rice and indigo prices weren’t much better.
Cotton grew well, but cleaning the seeds out of cotton fibers was a big problem. A slave picking out seeds by hand could clean only a few pounds a day. At that rate, even using cheap slave labor, there was little profit in raising cotton.
As the planters talked, a solution to their problem began to take shape in Whitney’s mind. While growing up in Massachusetts, Whitney had revealed a gift for invention.
As a boy, he had invented a machine to manufacture nails more quickly than making them by hand. From nails, he had gone on to hat pins and men’s canes. After graduating from college in 1792, Whitney went to Georgia to work as a tutor. Instead of tutoring, however, he became intrigued by the problem of cotton cleaning and, he wrote, “struck out a plan of a Machine in my mind.”
The result, as you will read, was an invention that changed life in both the North and the South—but in very different ways. This probably did not surprise Whitney. As a Northerner living in the South, he had already noticed many differences between the two areas of the country.
As American citizens, Northerners and Southerners shared a fierce pride in their country and a faith in democracy. Yet their outlooks and attitudes about many things were quite different. The two areas also differed in their economies, transportation systems, and societies. Between 1800 and 1850, these differences led to sharply conflicting views on many national issues—so much so that, at times, Northerners and Southerners seemed to be living in two separate worlds.
Geography, economy, transportation, and society made life in the
North very different from life in the South.
Inventor Eli Whitney's cotton gin would greatly affect life in both the North and the South.
The Worlds of North and South 355
19.2	Geography of the North
From the rocky shores of Maine to the gently rolling plains of Iowa, the North had a variety of climates and natural features. Northerners adapted to these geographical differences by creating different industries and ways of making a living.
Climate All the Northern states experienced four distinct seasons, from freezing winters to hot, humid summers. But the most northerly states, such as Maine and Minnesota, had colder winters and shorter summer growing seasons than states farther south, such as Pennsylvania and Ohio.
deforestation the clearing away of forests
Natural Features Different areas of the North had distinctive natural features. The jagged New England coast, for example, had hundreds of bays and inlets that were perfect for use as harbors. Shipbuilding, fishing, and commerce flourished in this area, while towns such as Boston became busy seaports.
Inland from the sea lay a narrow, flat plain with a thin covering of rocky soil. Farming was not easy here. Instead, many people turned to trade and crafts. Others moved west in search of better farmland.
New England’s hills rose sharply above V-shaped valleys carved by steep streams. The hillsides offered barely enough land for small farms, but they were covered with thick forests of spruce and fir. New Englanders found that they could make money by harvesting timber. The wood was used for shipbuilding and in trade with other countries.
Farther south in New York, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey, broad rivers like the Hudson and the Delaware had deposited rich soil over
the plains. People living in these areas supported themselves by farming.
Across the Appalachian Mountains lay the Central Plains, a large, forested region drained by the Ohio and Mississippi rivers. The Central Plains boast some of the best agricultural soil in the world. From Ohio to Illinois, settlers cleared the forests to make way for farms.
Industrious Northerners were thus changing the landscape. One result was deforestation, or the clearing of forests. By 1850, Americans had cleared about 177,000 square miles of dense forest. And with the growth of industry, the demand for coal and other minerals led to a big increase in mining after about 1820, especially in Pennsylvania.
This photograph shows a section of New England coastline. What geographic features can you identify?
19.3	Geography of the South
Ihe South extended from Maryland south to Florida and from the Atlantic Coast west to Louisiana and Texas. Climate and natural features encouraged Southerners to base their way of life on agriculture.
This photograph shows a Southern waterway. What geographic features can you identify?
Climate Compared to the North, the Southern states enjoyed mild winters and long, hot, humid summers. Plentiful rainfall and long growing seasons made this a perfect place for raising warm-weather crops that would have withered and died farther north.
tural Features Wide coastal plains edged the southern shoreline n Chesapeake Bay to the Gulf of Mexico. These fertile lowlands tched inland for as much as 300 miles in parts of the South.
Along the coast, the plains were dotted with swamps and marshes. *se damp lowlands were ideal for growing rice and sugarcane, which ived in warm, soggy soil. Indigo was grown on the dry land above swamps, and tobacco and corn were farmed farther inland. A visitor his area noted that “the Planters by the richness of the Soil, live [in] most easie and pleasant Manner of any People I have ever met with. Above the plains rose the Appalachians. Settlers who ventured into s fugged backcountry carved farms and orchards out of rolling hills 1 mountain hollows. Some backcountry farmers worked on land so eP that it was joked that they kept falling out of their cornfields. Although most people in the South were farmers, Southerners used ural resources in other ways as well. In North Carolina, they har-kd thick pine forests for lumber. From Chesapeake Bay in Virginia Maryland, they gathered fish, oysters, and crabs.
An especially important feature of the South was its broad, flat ers. Many of the South s earliest towns were built at the mouths of ers- As people moved away from the coast, they followed the rivers and, building their homes and farms alongside these water high-ys. Oceangoing ships could even sail up Southern rivers to conduct siness right at a planters private dock. Here, the ships were loaded & tobacco or other cash crops for sale in the Caribbean or Europe.
The Worlds of North and South 357

agrarian a person who favors an agricultural way of life and government policies that support agricultural interests
plantation a large area of privately owned land where crops were grown through the labor of workers who lived on the land
cotton gin a hand-operated machine that cleans seeds and other unwanted material from cotton
19.4	Economy of the South
The South’s economy was based on agriculture. Most white Southerners were agrarians who favored a way of life based on farming. This was especially true of rich plantation owners, who did not have to do the hard work of growing crops themselves.
Although most white Southerners worked their own small farms, plantation owners used slaves to grow such cash crops as tobacco, rice, sugarcane, and indigo. By the early 1790s, however, the use of slaves had begun to decline. Europeans were unwilling to pay high prices for tobacco and rice, which they could purchase more cheaply from other British colonies. Cotton was a promising crop, but growers who experimented with it had a hard time making a profit. Until someway was found to clean the seeds out of its fiber easily, cotton was of little value. Discouraged planters were buying fewer slaves, and even letting some go free.
In 1793, a young Yale graduate named Eli Whitney took a job tutoring children on a Georgia plantation. There, he saw his first cotton boll. Observing the way cotton was cleaned by hand, Whitney had an idea. If a machine could be invented which would clean the Cotton with expedition [speed],” he wrote his father, “it would be a great thing... to the Country.”
I
)
Whitney set to work. Six months later, he had a working machine that would change agriculture in the South.
The Impact of the Cotton Gin
Whitney’s “cotton engine,” called the cotton gin for short, was a simple machine that used rotating combs to separate cotton fiber from its seeds. Using a cotton gin, a single worker could clean as much cotton as 50 laborers working manually, or by hand.
Across the South, planters began growing cotton. Within ten years, cotton was the South’s most important crop. By 1860, sales of cotton overseas earned more than all other U.S. exports combined.
The cotton gin, invented in 1793, made the process of separating cotton fiber from the seeds quicker and easier. As a result, cotton quickly became the most important crop in the South.
358 Chapter 19
U.S. Agriculture, 1860
Expanding Demand for Land and Slaves Raising cotton in the same fields year after year soon wore out the soil. In search of fresh, fertile soil, cotton planters pushed west. By 1850, cotton plantations stretched from the Atlantic Coast to Texas.
Whitney had hoped his invention would lighten the work of slaves. Instead, it made slavery more important to the South than ever. As cotton spread westward, slavery followed. Between 1790 and 1850, the number of slaves in the South rose from 500,000 to more than 3 million.
With many white Southerners putting money into land and slaves, the South had little interest in building factories. As a result, wrote an Alabama newspaper, “We purchase all our luxuries and necessities from the North ... the slaveholder dresses in Northern goods, rides in a Northern saddle, sports his Northern carriage, reads Northern hooks. In Northern vessels his products are carried to market.
One successful Southern factory was the Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, Virginia. Using mostly slave labor, the factory made ammunition and weapons for the U.S. army, as well as steam engines, rails, and locomotives. But the vast majority of white Southerners made their living off the land.
This map shows the primary agricultural products of the United States in 1860. Which crops were primarily grown in the North? Which crops were primarily grown in the South?
The Worlds of North and South 3J
Industrial Revolution the
dramatic change in economies and cultures brought about by the use of machines to do work formerly done by hand
industrialist a person whose wealth comes from the ownership of industrial businesses and who favors government policies that support industry
19.5	Economy of the North
While the cotton gin made cotton the South s dominant crop, other types of machines were causing changes in the North. The people and the ideas behind these machines were part of the Industrial Revolution, which began in England in the late 1700s and spread to the United States and the rest of the world by the early 1800s. During the Industrial Revolution, people shifted from making things and doing work by hand to making things and doing work with machines. It created a new class of workers as well as a new class of industrialists, owners of large factories and other businesses based on manufacturing.
The Growth of Industry in the North One of the people who helped bring the Industrial Revolution to the United States was Francis Cabot Lowell, a Boston business owner. In 1810, Lowell visited England. There he saw how textile mill owners were using machines to spin cotton into thread and weave the thread into cloth. To power these devices, they used fast-moving streams to turn a wheel, which in turn supplied energy to the machinery.
Lowell memorized the design of the British machines. When he returned to Massachusetts, he built even better ones. By 1815, he and his partners had built one of the first American textile factories, along the Merrimack River outside Boston. This factory combined spinning and weaving machinery in the same building. One observer marveled that Lowell s mill took your bale of cotton in at one end and gave out yards of cloth at the other, after goodness knows what digestive process.”
The fast-flowing rivers of the North provided the power source fortextile mills, like the one pictured here.
360 Chapter 19

-. ..L,.', Ijlh jm lAs LZ „,i.
laklitobjjC.
pb ‘-' *«,n,
&'5?!5Ses»E»t
I

To run his machinery, Lowell hired young women, who jumped at the chance to earn cash wages. The “Lowell girls” toiled 12 to 15 hours each day, with only Sundays off. Soon textile mills were springing up all along other Northern rivers.
By the 1830s, inventors in both the United States and Europe had learned to use steam engines to power machinery. With steam engines, businesspeople could build factories anywhere, not just along rivers. Meanwhile, the inventive Eli Whitney showed manufacturers how they could assemble products even more cheaply by making them from identical, interchangeable parts.
New inventions and manufacturing methods made goods cheaper and more plentiful. But these innovations also shifted work from skilled craftspeople to less-skilled laborers. When Elias Howe developed the sewing machine in 1846, for example, skilled seamstresses could not compete. Some took jobs in garment factories, but they earned much less money working the sewing machines than they had sewing by hand.
For Northern industrialists, the new machines and production methods were a source of great wealth. Factory owners tended to favor a strong national government that could promote improvements m manufacturing, trade, and transportation. Southern agrarians, however, looked down on the newly rich industrialists and the labor ers who worked for them. Proud Southerners called factory workers wage slaves.” But they also worried that Northern interests might grow too powerful and threaten the South s way of life.
Factories such as this one produced more goods and made them more affordable. However, they also put many skilled craftspeople out of work.
The Worlds of North and South
U S. Industrial Cities and Raw Materials, 1860
Nebraska Territory
■;5'W
V W
Unorganized Territory
OR
aB
Unorganized Territory
Kansas Territory
£ 65CW
MS
LA
400 mile®
A TI W T1C oct.ax
W	70 W
•* Coal Iron ore
0 Textiles Free state
Slave state
Major
industrial city
TX
4 M E XI <t> ,
< w •*’ ....
l<"
New Orleans^?
.i,ij oj Mexico



This map shows industries and raw materials in the United States in 1860. What relationship do you see between where coal and iron ore are found and where industries are primarily located?
Machines Make Agriculture More Efficient The Industrial Revolution had effects on farming as well. New machines increased the rate at which agricultural goods could be produced. In 1831, Virginia farmer Cyrus McCormick built a working model of a rigf smart machine called a reaper. A reaper could cut 28 times more
grain than a single man using a scythe, which is a hand tool with a long, curved blade.
In 1847, McCormick built a reaper factory in Chicago, Illinois. Using interchangeable parts, his factory was soon producing several thousand reapers a year.
Around the same time, John Deere invented the steel-tipped ph1 This innovation drastically reduced the amount of labor needed to plow a field. By making it easier to plant and harvest large quantities of wheat, inventions like the steel-tipped plow and the reaper helped transform the Central Plains into America’s “bread basket.”
Thanks to the Industrial Revolution, the Northern economy gre' rapidly after 1800. By I860, the value of manufacturing in the North was ten times greater than in the South.
362 Chapter 19
19.6	Transportation in the North
Factory owners needed fast, inexpensive ways to deliver their goods to distant customers. South Carolina congressman John C. Calhoun had a solution. “Let us bind the republic together,” he said, “with a perfect system of roads and canals.” Calhoun called such projects internal improvements.
Building Better Roads In the early 1800s, most American roads were rutted boneshakers. In 1806, Congress funded the construction of a National Road across the Appalachian Mountains. The purpose of this highway was to connect the new western states with the East. With its smooth gravel surface, the National Road was a joy to travel.
As popular as the National Road was, in 1816 President James Monroe vetoed a bill that would have given states money to build more roads. Monroe argued that spending federal money for a state’s internal improvements was unconstitutional.
Fast Ships and Canals Even with better roads, river travel was still faster and cheaper than travel by land. But moving upstream against a river’s current was hard work. To solve this problem, inventors in both the United States and Europe experimented with boats powered by steam engines.
In 1807, Robert Fulton showed that steamboats were practical by racing the steamboat Clermont upstream on New York’s Hudson River. Said Fulton, “I overtook many boats and passed them as if they had been at anchor.” A Dutchman watching the strange craft from the shore shouted, “The devil is on his way up-river with a sawmill on a boat!” By the 1820s, smoke-belching steamboats were chugging up and down major rivers and across the Great Lakes.
Many new and fasterforms of transportation were put to use in the North How many of them can you identify in this painting?
The Worlds of North and South
Of course, rivers weren’t always located where people needed them. In 1817, the state of New York hired engineers and workers to build a 363-mile canal from the Hudson River to Lake Erie. The Erie Canal provided the first all-water link between farms on the Central Plains and East Coast cities. It was so successful that other states built canals as well.
Overseas traders also needed faster ways to travel. Sailing ships sometimes took so long to cross the Pacific Ocean that the goods they carried spoiled. In the 1840s, sleek clipper ships were introduced that cut ocean travel time in half. The clipper ships led to increased Northern trade with foreign ports around the world.
This map shows the locations of railroads in 1860. Notice thatthe railroad lines in the North connectto one another more than those in the South. How might this difference have affected the growth of trade and industry in the two areas?
Traveling by Rail The future of transportation, however, lay noton water, but on rails. Inspired by the success of steamboats, inventors developed steam-powered locomotives. These trains traveled faster than steamboats and could go wherever tracks could be laid—even across mountains.
So many railroad companies were laying tracks that, by the 1840s, railroads were the North’s biggest business. By 1860, more than 20,000 miles of rail linked Northern factories to cities hundreds of miles away.
U.S. Railroads, 1860
364 Chapter 19
19.7	Transportation in the South
Most of the rail lines in the United States were in the North. In the South, people and goods continued to move on rivers. The slow current and broad channels of Southern rivers made water travel easy and relatively cheap.
Cotton was the most important Southern product shipped by water. On plantation docks, slaves loaded cotton bales directly onto steam-powered riverboats. The riverboats then traveled hundreds of miles downstream to such port cities as Savannah, Georgia, or Mobile, Alabama. West of the Appalachians, most cotton moved down the Mississippi River, the largest of all the Southern waterways. The cotton boom made New Orleans, the port at the mouth of the Mississippi, one of the South’s few big cities. Once the cotton reached the sea, it was loaded onto sailing ships headed for ports in England or the North.
Because river travel was the South’s main form of transportation, most Southern towns and cities sprang up along waterways. With little need for roads or canals to connect these settlements, Southerners opposed bills in Congress that would use federal funds for internal improvements. Such projects, they believed, would benefit the North for more than the South.
Some railroads were built in the South, including lines that helped Southern farmers ship their products to the North. Southerners were Pfoud of the fact that the iron rails for many of the area’s railroads came from Virginia’s Tredegar Iron Works. Still, in 1860 the South had just 10,000 miles of rail, compared with over 20,000 miles in the North.
This photograph shows products being loaded onto steam-powered riverboats. What geographic feature of the South made riverboats the most practical way to transport goods?
The Worlds of North and South
The Granger Collection, New York
Wealthy Southern planters modeled their homes and lives on European nobility. Their large mansions had tall columns and fancy gardens. Most Southern whites, however, owned or worked on small farms, with few of the luxuries enjoyed by the rich.
19.8	Society in the South
For the most part, the South was not greatly affected by the Jacksonian spirit of equality and opportunity or the reform movements of the mid-1800s. Many Southerners in 1860 still measured wealth in terms of land and slaves. The result was a rigid social structure with a few rich plantation owners at the top, white farmers and workers in the middle, and African Americans—mostly enslaved—at the bottom.
Slavery deeply affected the lives of all Southerners, black and white. As long as the slave economy could be preserved, the South had little incentive to make progress economically or culturally. Even religion was affected. Southern church leaders defended the practice—taking a position
that divided them from many churches in the North, whose leaders taught that slavery was un-Christian. In the words of one historian, The South grew, but it did not develop.”
White Southerners A small group of wealthy plantation owners dominated the economy and politics of the South. They enjoyed a leisurely way of life, filled with parties and social visits. While their sons often went to colleges and universities, their daughters received little education. Instead, girls were brought up to be wives and hostesses.
Most white families owned some land, but only about one in four owned even one slave. The majority of white families worked their own fields and made most of what they needed themselves. About 10 percent of whites were too poor to own any land. They rented rugged mountain or forest land and paid the rent with the crops they raised.
P sch°°ls were few and often inferior to those in the North, many white children were illiterate.
can Am America"s in the South A small minority of the Afri-
forced m w 3118	Were free blacks- blacks were often
whites MosM ^H03 bad§es’pay extra taxes> and live separately fro®
S peonl	m tOWnS and Citi£S’ where they ^nd jobs as skilled
craftspeople, servants, or laborers.
Some worked as^^v Atrican Americans in the South were slaves, nursemaids ButC°° S’ Carpenters> blacksmiths, house servants, or past dusk	m°St WerC fieW hands who labored from dawn until
366 Chapter 19
19.9	Society in the North
As in the South, most people in the North were neither wealthy nor powerful. By 1860, about seven in ten Northerners still lived on farms. But more and more Northerners were moving to towns and cities. Between 1800 and 1850, the number of cities with populations of at least 2,500 had increased from 33 to 237. Except for a few cities around the Great Lakes, such as Chicago and Detroit, nearly all of the 50 largest urban areas were in the Northeast. Only 12 were in the slave states of the South. And Northern cities were growing rapidly. Between 1840 and 1860, the populations of New York, Philadelphia, and Boston nearly tripled. By 1860, more than a million people lived in New York.
New or old, Northern cities often lacked sewers and paved streets. In dirty and crowded neighborhoods, diseases spread rapidly. “The streets are filthy,” wrote one observer about New York City, “and the stranger is not a little surprised to meet the hogs walking about in them, for the purpose of devouring the vegetables and offal [trash] thrown into the gutter.”
African Americans in the North After the American Revolution, all of the Northern states had taken steps to end slavery. Although blacks in the North were free, they were not treated as equal to whites. In most states, they could not vote, hold office, serve on juries, or attend white churches and schools.
In 1860, most Northerners still lived on farms, but more and more people were moving to towns and cities like this one. These cities often sprang up near factories and railroad hubs.
The Granger Collection, NewYor
The Worlds of North and South 36j
This engraving shows Irish immigrants aboard a ship bound forthe United States in 1850. Most Irish immigrants settled in northeastern cities.
African Americans responded by forming their own churches and starting their own businesses. Because few employers would give them skilled jobs, African Americans often worked as laborers or servants.
immigrant a person who moves from one country to another. Such a movement is called immigration.
Immigrants Arrive in the North Between 1845 and 1860, four million immigrants—most of them from Ireland and Germany— swelled the North s growing population. In Ireland, a potato famine from 1845 to 1849 drove hundreds of thousands of families to the United States. In the German states, failed revolutions sent people fleeing overseas. Some immigrants had enough money to buy land and farm. But most settled in cities, where they found jobs in mills and factories.
Some Americans resented the newcomers, especially the Irish. Irish immigrants faced hostility because they were Roman Catholic. The United States at the time was mostly Protestant. In addition, many Irish immigrants were poor. Because they would accept very low wages, they were thought to take jobs away from native-born workers. German immigrants did not experience the same hostility that Irish
immigrants endured. Most German immigrants were Protestant and middle class.
Between 1820 and 1860, more than one-third of all U.S. immigrants came from Ireland. More than 1 million Irish immigrants came to the United States between 1846 and 1855. Too poor to travel,
most of them settled in northeastern cities, including New York, Boston, and Philadelphia.
[8 Chapter 19
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you learned how the North and the South developed differently from each other in the first half of the 1800s.
Geography Geography was one reason why Northerners and Southerners developed different ways of life. In the North, physical features such as harbors encouraged the growth of shipbuilding, fishing, and commerce. The land and climate supported the harvesting of timber and such crops as corn and wheat. In the South, the climate and land was ideal for warm-weather crops like cotton, rice, and sugarcane.
Economy In contrast to the variety of trades and businesses in the North, the South depended primarily on agriculture. Although only a minority of white Southerners owned slaves, much of the South’s economy depended on slave labor. In the North, the new inventions of the Industrial Revolution led to the development of mills and factories. Increasing numbers of people went to work as wage earners.
Transportation Steamboats and railroads improved transportation for Northerners, making it easier for them to travel and to ship goods over long distances. In the South, however, people continued to travel by river, and rail lines were fewer.
Society In the South, the wealthy few enjoyed great influence and power. But even the poorest whites ranked above African Americans, whether free or slave. The North, too, had its wealthy class. But farmers and laborers alike believed they could create comfortable lives for their families through hard work.
The Granger Collection, New York
Look at these images of the North (left) and the South (right). How many features
of geography, economy, transportation, and society can you i ent y.
The Worlds of North and South 369j
I
Reading Further
Water from rivers like the Merrimack powered the machinery of the textile mills. Atthe mills, machines and workers turned cotton from the South into thread and wove the thread into cloth.

75 Young Women
Prom 16 to 36 Tears of Age, WAxreso «o wosx nr m
COTTON MILLSr
LM.SOYUTON,
Agent for Procuring Help for the Silk
One Lowell mill girl explained why young women responded to recruiting posters: "Girls come here from the country of their own free will, because they can earn more money, and because they wish to see and know more of the world."
The Mill Girls of Lowell
In the first half of the 1800s, factory work gave girls and young women a taste of city life. Many of these young women came from farms to work in New England's textile mills. They wanted to earn money. They also wanted to find adventure in the cities that were growing up around the factories.
Row after row of looms line the huge wooden floor of a red-brick factory building. Long pulleys connect the looms to the ceiling and their power source. During a workday, hundreds of machines are running at one time. The racket is deafening. Clouds of cotton dust foul the air. The factory has huge glass windows, but they are kept closed so the air stays humid. That keeps the threads from breaking as machines turn them into cloth.
It is 1850. Over a mile of five- and six-story red-brick buildings line the banks of the Merrimack River in Lowell, Massachusetts. Six miles of canals run waterwheels for the 40 mill buildings. In the buildings, the waterwheels power 10,000 looms and 320,000 spindles. More than 10,000 people work in the factories of the young city. Every week, Lowell’s mills produce nearly a million yards—or 568 miles—of cloth.
The cloth is made of cotton. The cotton has traveled hundreds of miles by ship or rail from the South. Northern textile manufacturers, including those who own the factories in Lowell, get virtually all their cotton from the South, where African American slaves have planted, tended, harvested, and cleaned it.
On the factory floor, workers dart quickly back and forth between machines, so they can tend more than one at a time. Most of the workers are girls and women. Many have left family farms across New England to make a new life in Lowell and other cities that had sprouted up along New England’s rivers.
Factory work was difficult, but great rewards waited for the women who worked in the mills. Money, culture, and independence changed the lives of countless farm girls who, for a while at least, became factory workers.
The Mill-Girl Workforce
In big, bold letters, the recruiting notice announced jobs for 75 young women in the cotton mills in Lowell and Chicopee, Massachusetts. The women would commit to work for a year. In exchange, they would earn a dollar a week, paid in cash every month.
Today, the promise of a factory job might not seem so inviting, but it was quite appealing in the 1830s. The factories had an almost magnetic pull for many young women, especially those who had been raised on
Chapter 19
New England farms. If they stayed on the farms, most of them could count on marrying, having children, and working on the farm their whole lives. And farming in New England challenged even the hardiest workers. The population was growing, making land scarce. The soil was rocky, and the growing season was short. More and more people were looking elsewhere for work—to crafts, to the West, or to the cities.
Answering the call of the factory recruiter promised something new, different, and profitable. One young woman, Sally Rice, left her family in Vermont, eventually to work in a factory in Connecticut. In a letter written in 1839, she explained her reasons for leaving home.
I can never be happy there in among so many mountains ... I am [aljmost 19 years old. I must of course have something of my own before many years have passed over my head. And where is that something coming from if I go home and earn nothing...
You may think me unkind but how can you blame me for wanting to stay here. I have but one life to live and I want to enjoy myself as well as I can while I live.
Many other women shared Sally Rice’s feelings, and like her, they went to work in the factories.
While most of the women who first staffed the factories came from farms, some girls came for other reasons. Harriet Hanson’s mother moved to Lowell from Boston with her four small children after her husband died. Harriet started working at the mills when she was ten years old. After Lucy Larcom’s mother was widowed, she moved the family to Lowell from a nearby town.
Lucy started working in a factory when she was 11.
At the very least, life in the mills offered girls and women survival. At the most, it promised a chance to have something of their own, in-
cluding adventure, before they settled down and married.
This Lowell mil, girl was photographed at her loom in 1850. On 10,000 looms like this one, mill workers produced more than 500 miles of cloth every week.
8(1
■»
h monthly magazine, The Lowell Offering, published the writings of the "factory girls." The writers told of their lives and the working conditions in Lowell.
A Mill Girl's Life
In the 1830s, it would not have been considered proper for a young woman to move to a city alone, without an adult chaperone. The mill owners had to find a way to make the move to factory life feel safe for their workers and to reassure the workers’ parents. They also wanted to make sure the workers were well disciplined so that they would be efficient.
For those reasons, the manufacturing companies built boarding houses. The young women lived there under the protective watch of an older woman. They ate their meals at the boarding house, slept there, and often became friends with other boarders. One Lowell mill worker wrote to her father in New Hampshire that “I have a very good boarding place ... The girls are all kind and obliging. The girls that I room with are all from Vermont and good girls too.”
The mill girls had opportunities in Lowell that they would never have had on the farm. They could attend lectures and plays, and join literary discussion groups and libraries. And their wages allowed them to shop. One woman whose sister worked in Lowell described how the women who went to the factories came home changed: “They went in their plain, country-made clothes, and after working several months, would come home for a visit, or perhaps to be married, in their tasteful city dresses and with more money in their pockets than they had ever owned before.”
Young women in Lowell even started their own magazine, The Lowell Offering. From 1840 to 1845, the girls wrote essays, stories, and poems. Some of their writing told about how much they liked their lives in Lowell. Other pieces told stories about women coming to work in the mills so they could help their families out of financial problems. But when historians looked at other sources—like bank accounts—they discovered that most of the mill girls were not helping their families at all. Instead, they were saving money to use later for school, clothes, or a dowry (money they would bring to a marriage).
Chapter 19
Hard Work at the Mills
The mill girls enjoyed the opportunities they had in Lowell and other mill towns. But they had to work very hard in the factories to support themselves.
Workdays were long and ruled by the bell. In the summer, the wake-up bell rang at 4:30 A.M. Twenty minutes later, the girls reported to work. They had a half-hour break for breakfast and another for dinner. (Dinner was the afternoon meal). They did not finish their workday until 7 P.M.
Not only were the workdays long, but the work was hard.
Harriet Hanson described her work as a doffer. Doffers were the youngest girls. Their job was to take bobbins that had filled with yarn off the machines and replace them with empty ones.
She remembered her job many years later:
I can see myself now, racing down the alley, between the spinning-frames, carrying in front of me a bobbin-box bigger than I was. [Doffers] had to be very swift in their movements, so as not to keep the spinning-frames stopped long.
—Harriet H. Robinson, Loom & Spindle or Life Among the Early Mill Girls, 1898
Lucy Larcom described being overwhelmed by a machine she was supposed to tend: “It had to be watched in a dozen directions every minute,” she wrote. “I felt as if the half-live creature with its great, groaning joints, and whizzing fan, was aware of my incapacity to manage it.”
The mill work got more demanding for women over time. Company owners wanted to make more money, so they increased the amount of work the women had to do and lowered their wages.
The mill girls did not simply accept such changes. Several times, they went out on strike to protest pay cuts and increases in the fees they paid to live in the boarding houses.
The women described themselves as “daughters of freemen.” Their ancestors had fought to be free from English rule, they said. They believed that the factory owners’ actions interfered with their freedom, and so they rebelled.
Over time, mill girls began to leave the factories, finding better opportunities elsewhere. By the 1850s, as immigrants began filling the mill jobs, the era of the flhll girls was coming to a close.
...

To take effect on and after Jan. 3d, 1863.
The standard being that of theWes^rn^RaifRoad, which is the Merit!!*# time at j
MORNING BELLS.
Bell .la, M.446. A.M. Second Bell rin, in u 5, A.M.
YARD CATES
Will be opened u rtnStn, of Morale, Belle, of Me.l Bell, ml of Eieeing Belb, and kept open ten minutes.	"	-	.
WORK COMMENCE .?
At ten minutes after last Morning Bell, and ten minutes after Bell trhieh *<riog»frr' from Meals.	<•<
/	' BREAKFAST BELLS. \'
| October 1st, to March 31st, inclusite, ring out at 7, A. M.} ring in at 7.30, A.M »• April 1st, to Sept. 30th, inclusive, ring out at 0.30, A. M.; ring ui »t 7, Ab M.
DINNER BELLS.
Ring out at 12.30, P. M.; ring in at 1, P. M.
■ EVENING BELLS.
Ring out atO.30* P.M,	I. / ,
Saturdays when the Sun sets previous to 6.?0, “ At such times,
„	.	ring out at Sunset.	'
’ fe Ml „«*#». «iajt»f .iroko of ih# ftill i. eoi»klei«4 « wiling UwvtMo.
Shown here is a work schedule from 1853. The mill girls sang a song to protest pay cuts and long hours: "Oh! Isn't it a pity, such a pretty girl as I / Should be sent to the factory to pine away and die? I Oh! I cannot be a slave, I will not be a slave/For I'm so fond of liberty/ That I cannot be a slave."

oud of their work, mill girls often posed for photographs with the of their trade. These women are holding the bobbins they use to
Jave cloth.
The Worlds of North and Sout]
The Granger Collection, NewYork

