Chapter 28
The United States Becomes a World Power
Should U.S. actions in world affairs around the turn of the 20th century be praised or condemned?
28.1 Introduction
William McKinley owed Theodore Roosevelt a big favor. Roosevelt had just helped him get elected president. Roosevelt had spoken all over the United States in 1896, promoting McKinley s support of business and industry. With energy and inspiration, he attacked McKinley’s opponents. These were Democrats who had adopted some Populist ideas. With the nation in the midst of an economic depression, Roosevelt feared political instability. He cried that McKinley’s opponents planned nothing less than “revolution.”
Now Roosevelt wanted McKinley to appoint him to be assistant secretary of the navy. McKinley, who favored peace, feared that Roosevelt was too warlike. Still, he gave Roosevelt the job. As he took office, Roosevelt said, “No triumph of peace is quite so great as the supreme triumphs of war ... It is through strife, or the readiness for strife, that a nation must win greatness.”
Some newspapers called Roosevelt patriotic. Others worried that he would push the country into war. Americans had mixed feelings about getting involved in international affairs. Expanding across the continent had given the United States territory to move into for decades to come. Recovery from the Civil War, followed by industrial expansion, had also given Americans plenty to focus on at home.
Now the West was more settled, and the United States was an industrial and agricultural leader. To keep the economy growing, business leaders wanted to market and sell products overseas. The national pride that had inspired Manifest Destiny was calling for new challenges.
Theodore Roosevelt agreed. He allied himself with expansionists people who wanted to extend the nation s power within the Western Hemisphere and around the world. In this chapter, you will learn how expansionists achieved their goals. As it flexed its muscles overseas, the United States gained new territories and became a world power.
When Theodore Roosevelt became president in 1901, he carried out foreign policiesthatexpanded U.S. involvement around the world—giving the United States a greater role in world affairs.
The American eagle spreads its wings over a canal zone in Panama the Philippines, and Puerto Rico, al, under U.S. control by 1903.
The United States Becomes a World Power
PREPARING FOR THE HEATED TERM.
Kiurf Andy awl his wan Jiilly lay in a yreal stock of Russian ice in order to cool down the tonal majority.
In this political cartoon, Secretary of State William Seward pulls a wheelbarrow containing a block of ice. President Andrew Johnson is pushing the wheelbarrow. What did this cartoonist think about the purchase of Alaska?
imperialism the policy of extending a nation’s power by gaining political and economic control over other countries
28.2 The Nation Stretches Its Wings
In 1867, Secretary of State William Seward arranged for the United States to purchase Alaska from Russia. At the time, few people thought that acquiring this vast wilderness was a good idea. Even at a price of just two cents an acre, many labeled the deal “Seward’s Folly.”
But the “arctic wasteland” turned out to have thick forests, plentiful fish and wildlife, and mild coastal climates. Eventually, settlers would discover gold, copper, coal, and other minerals there. With such natural resources at stake, expansionists felt that the United States should gain control over other areas of the world as well.
Amyress.	addition to arranging the pur-
chase of Alaska, Seward also secured the rights to the Midway Islands. Located in the Pacific Ocean between California and Asia, the Midway Islands were annexed by the United States in 1867.
Rise of Expansionism Some Americans objected to expansionism, saying that it was contrary to American values. Taking over other lands, declared former senator Carl Schurz, would mean that “our old democratic principle that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed will have to go overboard.”
Others warned that such takeovers would cause revolutions abroad. Some raised racist objections, arguing that nonwhites in other countries could never learn American values.
William Jennings Bryan, who had run for president against McKinley, believed that the United States could be powerful without ta ing over other lands. He said that the nation “has exerted upon
uman race an influence more potent for good than all the other tions of the earth combined, and it has exerted that influence with-
out the uSe of the sword or Gatling [machine] gun.”
y e 1890s, however, American business leaders were eager to
g es and establish plantations in new places. Others wanted new markets for finished products. For years, European countries had been practicing imperialism, building empires by taking control of the
and eC°nomies of other countries. U.S. expansionists n e o o ow their example. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge declared,
worldTn 7s the "ag ■ ■ ■ As of >he grea, nations of the e mted States must not fall out of the line of march.”
554 Chapter 28
Annexing Hawaii Commerce drove U.S. expansionists to develop an interest in Hawaii, a group of islands located in the Pacific Ocean. Americans had first come to these islands in the 1820s as missionaries. Their goal was to convert the native Hawaiians to Christianity. The Hawaiians, whose ancestors had come from the South Pacific, had lived on these islands for more than a thousand years. They were ruled by their own kings and queens.
In 1835, a Boston merchant established a large sugar plantation in Hawaii. Before long, American-owned sugar and pineapple plantations dotted the islands. The planters brought laborers to Hawaii from China and Japan to work in their vast fields. Under pressure from the planters, the Hawaiians agreed in 1887 to let the United States establish a naval base at Pearl Harbor, on the island of Oahu (oh-AH-hoo). The planters also persuaded Congress to allow Hawaiian sugar to be imported into the United States without paying any tariff (import tax).
U.S. sugar growers objected that the law now favored Hawaiian sugar over domestically grown sugar. They convinced Congress to give a bonus to growers in the United States. Hawaiian planters wanted that bonus, too. So they asked the United States to annex Hawaii.
Meanwhile, native Hawaiians increasingly resented being pushed around by Americans. When Queen Liliuokalani (lee-LEE-uh-woh-kuh-LAH-nee) took the throne in 1891, people rallied around her call of “Hawaii for Hawaiians.” Americans in Hawaii feared that they would lose their land. With help from U.S. marines in 1893, sugar planters forced Queen Liliuokalani to give up her throne. Now in control, the planters established a new government for the islands.
Despite the planters’ wishes, President Grover Cleveland refused to support the annexation of Hawaii. Cleveland, who opposed imperialism, said that Hawaii should be ruled by Hawaiians. But in 1898, under President McKinley, the United States did annex Hawaii.
U.S. Interest in Japan and China In the mid- to late 1800s, the United States turned its attention to Japan and China. The U.S. government signed a trade treaty with Japan in 1858. Several European countries had made efforts to control trade with China. The United States wanted to maintain its own access to Chinese markets. In 1899 and 1900, the U.S. government issued what became known as the Open Door Policy. It called on foreign nations to allow free trade in China. 28.3 "A Splendid Little War"
Closer to the United States, Americans established huge sugar plantations on the Caribbean island of Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida. Like nearby Puerto Rico, Cuba was still a Spanish colony.
By the 1890s, U.S. expansionists wanted to annex both of these islands. To support their ambitions, they argued that it was time for the United States to enforce the Monroe Doctrine. No European country, they said, should control territory in the Western Hemisphere.
Queen Liliuokalani, the last reigning monarch of Hawaii, insisted that native Hawaiians should control the islands. American planters organized a revolt that dethroned her.
The United States Becomes a World Power
I
I
.1


RA1NE EXPLOSION
i>t Sigsbee and 'Consul-General Lee Are in Doubt-Jhe World Has Sen! i Special Tug, With Subrrmie DiVers, to Havana to Find Out—Lee Asssjor T an ImmecSate Court of Jnquiry—Capt. Sigsbee's Suspicions, '	'
JUM. SIGSBEE. lift SUPPRESSED DESPATCH TO THF STATE DEPARTMENT, SAYS THE ACCIDENT WAS HADE POSStBLE BY AN Dl E. C. PendtetonlJujI Mixed from Havana.’Says He Overtieard Talk There ot a Plot lo Blow Up the:
---- ZaHakErthe OyffSiWe Expert, and Olher Expats Report lo The World that Ihe Wreck Was f
Accidental—Washington Qfdctsh Ready (a Vigrxous Action if Spanish ResponsMty /
Can Be Show-Divers to Be Sent Down to Make Careful Exa ’•
When an explosion sunkthe battleship USS Maine and killed 260 men, Americans accused Spain of causing the tragedy and demanded war. In 1976, Admiral H. G. Rickover, acting forthe U.S. Navy, presented evidence thatthe explosion was probably caused by spontaneous combustion in one of the coal containers.
Cubans Struggle for Independence The Cubans themselves had staged an unsuccessful revolt against Spain in 1868. In 1895, under the leadership of Jose Marti (ho-ZAY mar-TEE), Cubans again tried to win their independence.
To crush this movement, the Spanish herded men, women, and children into “reconcentration camps.” Forced to live with inadequate food and medical care, tens of thousands of people died.
U.S. newspapers jumped at the chance to report stories of Cuban suffering. Competing fiercely for customers, some newspapers resorted to yellow journalism, offering sensational and shocking reports. Some of these stories were based on rumors and untruths. One said that a Spanish general was “feeding prisoners to sharks.”
As sympathy for Cubans grew, more and more Americans were willing to go to war for Cuba. To help Americans in Cuba in case of trouble, President McKinley sent the new battleship USS Maine to the island’s capital city, Havana, in January 1868.
The Spanish-American War Trouble soon erupted in Havana. About three weeks after the Maine arrived, an explosion destroyed the battleship, killing 260 U.S. sailors. No one knew whether the explosion was caused by an accident, a mine, or a bomb. But many Americans were quick to blame Spain.
Young men rushed to join the army, raising the battle cry “Remem-her the Maine! Senators shouted, “Free Cuba!” Hoping to avoid war, McKinley offered to work out a solution between the Spanish and Cubans. But the Spanish did not respond.
Under pressure from newspapers and members of Congress calling him a coward, McKinley asked Congress to declare war. Congress quickly agreed and, in April 1898, voted to go to war with Spain. At the same time, Congress approved a resolution stating that the United States intended “to leave the government and control of the Island [Cuba] to its people.”
i !i
The Spanish-American War in the Caribbean, 1898
When Spain refused to grant Cuba independence, the United States declared war on Spain. In July 1898, U.S. forces sank or captured the entire Spanish fleet after the Battle of San Juan Hill. The United States then defeated Spanish troops in Puerto Rico.
556 Chapter 28
The U.S. Army quickly grew from 30,000 to over 274,000 men. Roosevelt resigned from his position as assistant secretary of the navy and put together his own regiment. A mixture of powerful, wealthy men and seasoned ranch hands, it came to be called the Rough Riders.
After long preparations, the Rough Riders and 17,000 other Americans arrived in Cuba in June 1898. Seeing that Cuban fighters lacked the strength or weapons to force the Spanish out of fortified cities and harbors, Roosevelt and his Rough Riders decided to capture Santiago, a major city. To do this, they had to capture nearby San Juan Hill, from which Spanish forces were able to defend the city.
The attacking force included the Rough Riders and African American troops from several regiments. Up the hill the troops charged, braving Spanish fire. “They walked to greet death at every step, many of them, as they advanced, sinking suddenly or pitching forward ... but others waded on, stubbornly, forming a thin blue line that kept creeping higher and higher up the hill,” wrote an American reporter. “It was a miracle of self-sacrifice, a triumph of bull-dog courage.”
The Americans captured San Juan Hill. Realizing that Santiago was lost, the Spanish tried to save their ships, sending them steaming out of the harbor. But Americans sank or captured every ship. The Spanish soon surrendered.
The Spanish-American War lasted just four months. Only 345 Americans died in combat, although 5,500 died of disease. Many Americans agreed with Secretary of State John Hay that it had been “a splendid little war.”
Under the terms of the peace treaty between the United States and Spain, Cuba gained its independence from Spain, and Puerto Rico came under U.S. rule. Spain also ceded Guam, an island in the Pacific Ocean, to the United States. In a 1903 treaty with Cuba, the United States leased land in Cuba to establish a naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
The United States Becomes a World Powei
General Emilio Aguinaldo believed that the United States would help the Philippines gain independence from Spain. When the United States annexed the Philippines instead, he fought for Filipino freedom.
28.4	The Philippines
After the Maine exploded in Cuba, Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt sent a telegram to Admiral George Dewey, the head of the U.S. fleet in the Pacific. “In the event of declaration of war,” the telegram ordered, “[begin] offensive operations in Philippine Islands.” The Spanish-American War had expanded to include the Philippine Islands, halfway around the globe from Cuba.
Battle at Manila Bay The Philippines provided Spain’s main base in the Pacific. The islands’ people, called Filipinos, had tried many times to throw off Spanish colonial rule. In 1898, they were trying again. Led by General Emilio Aguinaldo (ah-ghee-NAHL-doh), they had begun attacking the Spanish army and government officials. Now their struggle was about to become part of the war between the United States and Spain.
Dewey’s fleet arrived in Manila, the Philippine capital, just five days after the United States declared war against Spain. At dawn on May 1, 1898, U.S. battleships faced Spanish gunships. As naval bands struck up “The Star-Spangled Banner,” sailors stood on deck and saluted the flag. These men were about to engage in what would be the first battle of the Spanish-American War.
By 11 A.M., the entire Spanish fleet was burning, sunk, or sinking. Spain s old wooden ships were no match for the modern steel U.S. ships with well-trained crews. Only one American had died in the battle.
The Spanish-American War in the Philippines, 1898
Defeating the Spanish Dewey block aded Manila’s port until U.S. troops could arrive to take over the city. Filipino fighters, allied with Dewey, surrounded Manila. The Filipinos believed that the coming Americans would help them gain independence. While they waited, Aguinaldo issued the Philippine Declaration of Independence, formed a national government, and designed a national flag.
Once U.S. reinforcements showed up, the Spanish agreed to “lose” a fake battle and surrender to the Americans. They didnt want to give themselves up to the Filipinos, who resented Spanish rule so intensely.
The Spanish-American War was fought on two fronts, Cuba and the Philippines. In the Philip' pines, located south of China, U.S. forces led by Admiral Dewey attacked and destroyed the entire Spanish fleet in Manila Bay.
558 Chapter 28
Fighting the Filipinos In a treaty negotiated after the surrender, the United States “bought” the Philippines from Spain for $20 million. Then, in 1899, Congress voted to annex the Philippines.
Aguinaldo’s government felt betrayed. Angrily, the Filipino leader called for “war without quarter to the false Americans who have deceived us! Either independence or death!” For three years, more than 80,000 Filipino fighters fought off better-trained and better-armed U.S. troops. Soldiers on both sides tortured prisoners. Americans became increasingly cruel, harming civilians and destroying villages.
Some Americans protested that denying independence to the Philippines violated U.S. ideals. Carl Schurz, a leader among anti-imperialists, said, “We shall, for the first time since the abolition of slavery, again have two kinds of Americans: Americans of the first class, who enjoy the privilege of taking part in the Government... and Americans of the second class, who are to be ruled... by the Americans of the first class.
But the expansionists won the day. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge argued that “Manila with its magnificent bay... will keep us open to the markets of China.” President McKinley himself believed that the
Philippines could become “a land of plenty.
More than 20,000 Filipinos and about 4,000 Americans died in t e struggle. When the revolt was finally put down, the Americans set up a nonmilitary government to prepare Filipinos for indepen e^ce Americans built roads, hospitals, and schools. But the United States did not grant the Philippines independence until 1946.
A long war between the United States and the Filipinos who resisted U.S. control resulted in heavy casualties. More than 20,000 Filipinos were killed before the Philippines became independent in 1946.
The United States Becomes a World Power
The Panama Canal Zone, 1914
The United States took control of the Panama Canal Zone in 1903 and started building the canal the following year. By 1914, the Panama Canal was complete.
It provided a shortcut for ships traveling between the Atlantic and the Pacific.
28.5 Panama and the Canal
In 1900, Americas favorite hero from the Spanish-American War, Theodore Roosevelt, was elected vice president. “We stand on the threshold of a new century,” Roosevelt declared. “Is America a weakling, to shrink from the work of the great powers? No. The young giant of the West stands on a continent and clasps the crest of an ocean in either hand.”
Dreaming of a Canal Roosevelt wanted to join the Atlantic and Pacific oceans with a canal. If ships could move quickly between the Atlantic and the Pacific, the navy would be better able to defend the nation’s new territories. In addition, businesses would gain from lower shipping costs.
In September 1901, President McKinley was shot and killed by an assassin, and Roosevelt became president.
In his first speech to Congress, Roosevelt argued for the canal. “No single great material work which remains to be undertaken on this continent is of such consequence to the American people,” he told the lawmakers.
Congress soon approved funding. In 1903, Roosevelt offered Colombia $10 million for land in their province of Panama, the narrowest part of Central America. The Colombian senate refused, believing that the United States was trying to take a weaker country’s valuable resources.
Furious, Roosevelt sent a U.S. warship to Panama. Roosevelt knew that Panamanians wanted independence from Colombia. The day after t e s ip arrived, a revolution started in Panama. With U.S. marines
eeping Colombian soldiers from reaching Panama’s harbors, the rebels quickly won.
The new country of Panama agreed to accept $10 million in •l ang j °r	tbe United States control over a “canal zone” ten
, e' $°me U’S- senators and newspapers—and countries all r., y.°r objected to America’s “gunboat diplomacy.” But most
ofthe public supported the president.
1904 P	Ditch Construction on the canal began in
clothes inriT faCed terrible conditions. “We had to bathe, wash our it ” said on 6.Same r*ver; drink the same river water and cook with the project	tbree"cluarters of American workers had quit
560 Chapter 28
The majority of employees were workers from the West Indies who could not afford to go home. To prevent deadly yellow fever and malaria, crews worked to eliminate the mosquitoes that carried these diseases. They drained ditches, spread oil on swamps, and screened doors and windows. Within two years, canal workers were no longer dying from these diseases.
A new chief engineer improved housing and strictly organized the huge project. Using dynamite and huge steam shovels, men made a wide, deep cut through Panama’s mountains. The excavated dirt was moved by railroad car to lower elevations. Here, workers created earthen dams to form three giant lakes. Engineers supervised the construction of locks, a type of gate that would allow water levels to be raised and lowered along the canal.
By the time the 51-mile-long canal opened in 1914, Roosevelt had left office. His influence in the Panamanian revolution continued to be controversial. Roosevelt himself admitted, “I took the Canal Zone.” In 1921, Congress apologized to Colombia and gave it $25 million. But anti-American feelings remained high in Latin America, and Panamanians increasingly resented U.S. control of the Canal Zone. In 2000, the United States returned the zone to Panama.
The Culebra Cut, shown here, was one ofthe engineering miracles that allowed engineers to complete the Panama Canal in ten years. Millions of pounds of dynamite blasted apart the mountain. The earth was then used to construct dams to form lakes.
The United States Becomes a World Poj
nationalism devotion to a national or ethnic identity, including the desire for independence from rule by foreign countries
militarism a policy of glorifying military power and military ideas and values
28.6	The Outbreak of World War I
By the time the first ship sailed through the Panama Canal, the world’s attention was not on Panama, but on far-off Europe. In August 1914, German troops poured across Belgium, on their way to try to conquer France. Europe was at war.
Tensions in Europe European countries had long competed with each other for colonies, trade, and territory. By the early 1900s, nationalism was complicating these rivalries. Austria-Hungry had built an empire by taking over smaller countries in the part of eastern Europe known as the Balkans. Nationalism inspired in the Balkan people a burning desire to be independent of Austrian rule.
As tensions grew, European leaders looked for safety in militarism, a policy of glorifying military power and military ideas and values. When Germany built up its navy to challenge Great Britain’s fleet, Great Britain constructed more battleships. As Germany’s army grew, France built up its own army.
European countries also looked for safety in alliances. In secret treaties, Germany and Austria-Hungary agreed to help each other in case of attack. Great Britain, Russia, and France made similar agreements. Europe was dividing into what amounted to armed camps.
Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife are shown here shortly before being assassinated by a Serbian nationalist. The assassination triggered World War I.
Assassination Leads to War An outburst of nationalism lit the fuse of war. On June 28, 1914, the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, was visiting the city of Sarajevo in the province of Bosnia. Many Bosnians were Serbs who wanted to be part of nearby Serbia instead of Austria-Hungary. A Serbian nationalist jumped out of a crowd and fatally shot the archduke and his wife.
Outraged, Austria-Hungary accused Serbia of having a hand in the assassinations and pressured Serbia to give up most of its independence.
When the Serbs refused, Austria-Hungary declared war. The Russians stepped in to defend the Serbs. The Germans came to the aid of Austria-Hungary by declaring war on Russia. Russia’s ally, France, began to prepare for war.
Eventually, more than a dozen countries took sides in the “Great War.” Decades later, people called the conflict World War I. Austria-Hungary and Germany headed the Central Powers. France, Russia, and Great Britain led the Allied Powers.
Like most Americans, President Wood-row Wilson wanted to stay out of the war. Declaring that the United States would remain neutral, Wilson begged citizens to be impartial in thought as well as deed.
562 Chapter 28
A military tactic called trench warfare was used extensively in World War I. Hundreds of miles of trenches, like this trench for British soldiers, provided protection for soldiers during attacks and allowed supplies and reinforcements to be delivered to the front.
28.7	A New Kind of Warfare
By September 1914, approximately 6 million soldiers were on the march across Europe. On Germany’s Eastern Front, German troops fought Russians. On the Western Front, German forces advanced quickly before being stopped by French and British troops at the Marne River, about 40 miles outside the city of Paris. With neither army able to advance, both sides dug long, narrow ditches called trenches to protect their soldiers.
Trench Warfare For the next three years, the war in the west was fought from two parallel lines of trenches. Men ate, slept, fought, and died in these miserable ditches. Eventually, the lines of trenches stretched for 600 miles across France.
Each side protected its front trench with barbed wire and booby traps. The land between opposing trenches was a deadly no-mans land.” Attacking soldiers came under intense fire from the men in the trenches. Thousands upon thousands of soldiers died trying to advance their line of trenches a few yards.
The trenches were wretched places, infested with rats, lice, and disease. “ We are not leading the life of men at all, wrote an American who had volunteered to fight with the British forces, but that of animals, living in holes in the ground, and only showing outside to fight and to feed.”
New Weapons New weapons added to the horror of trench warfare. “We never got anywhere near the Germans,” one English corpo-ral remembered. “The machine-guns were just mowing the top of the trenches.” These new machine guns fired hundreds of bullets a min ute. By the end of 1914, the French had lost 300,000 men. Germany lost more than 130,000 soldiers in a single battle.

Ihe Unit
States Becomes a World Powej
European Alliances in World War I
Tensions in Europe caused by nationalism and a military buildup led to war between two alliances—the Allied Powers and the Central Powers. The Central Powers included Germany. German submarines called U-boats concentrated on attacking ships around Great Britain.
The next spring, a green cloud floated over the Allied lines. Soldiers gasped and died, their throats and noses burning. The Germans had invented poison gas. Soon both sides were using chemical weapons.
The armies’ new technology and strategies were effective for defense, but not for decisive attack. At one point, the British tried for six months to advance their lines. They gained only five miles and lost 420,000 men. “The deadlock here is permanent,” wrote an American volunteer.
War at Sea To supply soldiers in the trenches with food, ammunition, and other supplies, the warring nations
bought goods from neutral countries. Each side tried to cut off the flow of supplies to its enemy.
Most trade, especially with the United States, was by sea. Great Britain had the world s greatest fleet and numerous ocean ports. Germany had a strong navy, but its only access to the ocean was through the North Sea. To close German ports, Great Britain laid mines in the North Sea. This blockade stopped most of the neutral shipping and kept the German fleet bottled up in harbors for most of the war.
Unable to use its surface ships, the German navy tried to blockade Great Britain using submarines, called U-boats (for “underwater boats ). Fearing that the British would try to disguise their ships as neutral, Germany announced that it might sink vessels flying the flags of neutral countries. Because submarines on the surface were easy targets for enemy fire, German submarines began sinking vessels on sight, instead of rising to the surface to give warning, as was expected even in wartime.
Germany Sinks the Lusitania The German embassy in the Unit-tes p aced newspaper ads warning passengers not to sail to Great
ntain an specifically not to take the Lusitania, a British luxury lnCr* j	1915, six days after leaving New York, the Lusitania
neared the coast of Ireland. Suddenly a ship’s lookout shouted, “Torpedo coming on the starboard side!” Within moments, the ship exploded an quic y sank, killing 1,198 people, including 128 Americans.
564 Chapter 28
Americans were outraged. One newspaper called the German attack wholesale murder. When President Wilson protested, Germany said that the Lusitania had been carrying arms. Still, Germany apologized and offered to pay for damages. Hoping to keep the United States out of the war, Germany also promised not to attack merchant and passenger ships without warning in the future.
Protected by this promise, U.S. manufacturers increased their trade with the Allies. Trade with Allied countries swelled to $3.2 billion in 1916, while trade with the Central Powers dropped to $1 million. Americans were not fighting in the war, but they had definitely taken sides.
28.8	To Make the World "Safe for Democracy"
After the sinking of the Lusitania, Wilson decided that the United States needed to prepare in case war became necessary. He worked with Congress to get money to improve the army and navy. Still, neither Wilson nor the country wanted war. In 1916, Wilson won reelection under the slogan, “He Kept Us Out of War.”
Wilson also tried to start peace talks. But European leaders, having lost so many soldiers, rejected Wilson’s call for “peace without victory.”
The United States Enters the War The Germans soon risked war with the United States again. Even though U-boats were sinking 50 to 100 British merchant ships per month, enough were getting through to keep the Allies supplied. Desperate to prevent an Allied vie tory, the Germans decided to cut off British supplies before their own ran out. In February 1917, Germany resumed sinking merchant ships from other countries without warning.
In March, U-boats torpedoed three U.S. merchant ships, killing many Americans. In fact, these ships had been carrying weapons to the Allies. The Germans knew that this attack might bring the United States into the war, but they hoped to win before America was ready to fight.
It was a fatal mistake. Addressing a special session of Congress, Wilson urged a declaration of war. America would fight alongside the Allies, he said, not just to protect neutral shipping, but because “the world must be made safe for democracy.”
Congress greeted Wilson’s speech with applause. Later, Wilson reflected,
“My message today was a message of death for our young men. How strange it seems to applaud that.
Osh?
S ft *

Here, Woodrow Wilson appears before Congress to ask for a declaration of war against Germany. Although Wilson tried to avoid war, he felt that continued U-boat attacks on merchant ships gave him no choice.
The United States Becomes a World Power
FOR U.S. ARMY
NEAREST RECRUITING STATION
To recruit the necessary men for an army to send to Europe, the United States resorted to the draft. All men between the ages of 18 and 45 had to register. Within a few months, the army grew from 200,000 men to over 4 million.
Americans Prepare to Fight On April 6,1917, Congress declared war. The Allies rejoiced, hoping for U.S. supplies—and soldiers. Allied ships were sinking faster than they could be replaced. To get U.S. supplies delivered safely, convoys of U.S. warships started escorting cargo vessels, protecting them from attack. U.S. destroyers also helped the British navy assault U-boats. These strategies dramatically reduced shipping losses.
When the United States entered the war, it had only 200,000 soldiers, and most of those had limited training. Congress quickly authorized a national draft. Soon, 3 million men had been drafted. Another 2 million volunteered.
Fighting and Winning U.S. troops who sailed overseas were called the American Expeditionary Force (AEF). As they began arriving in Europe in June 1917, AEF soldiers soon learned from the Allies about trench warfare. The U.S. commander, General John J. Pershing, hated these terrible conditions for soldiers. He also realized that trench warfare was not winning the war. He worked on a plan for driving the Germans out of the trenches and forcing them to retreat into open country. Meanwhile, Russia had dropped out of the war. With millions of soldiers dead and starvation spreading across the country, Russians had revolted against their ruler, the czar. Russia’s new government made peace with the Germans. This enabled Germany to bring soldiers back from the east, swelling their western forces to 3,500,000 men.
The German forces rushed to capture Paris before large numbers of Americans could arrive from overseas. They pushed quickly through me village of Chateau-Thierry and a nearby forest called Belleau Wood. They were within 50 miles of Paris when Americans reinforced the
T	French- Gradually, U.S. machine guns and artillery enabled
the Allies to push the Germans back.
By the summer of 1918, more than a million Americans were in urope. Pershing set his Allied offensive into motion. His plan took i nta^ ° several new technologies that had been developed during
ar. an s could advance through trenches. Airplanes could de-
, C c*161 jUn ^re and droP bombs. Carefully coordinating huge umbers of soldiers, tanks, airplanes, and artillery, the Allies forced
the weakened Germans back to their own border
to an°>rVO1 f1 C mVaS1On of their own country, German leaders agreed
in four	°r Cease_fire* On November 11, 1918, for the first time
in four years, the guns were silenced.
had died Pnt	^orr^e<^ ^e world. More than 9 million people
ering the war late, the United States had lost 116,000 lives.
566 Chapter 28
28.9	The Struggle for Peace
Less than two months after the fighting ended in Europe, President Wilson traveled to Paris to take part in peace talks. He was cheered by huge crowds. The United States had saved the French from endless war. And many Europeans welcomed Wilson’s eagerness to prevent future wars.
Fourteen Points for World Peace Months earlier, Wilson had presented to Congress a 14-point proposal for a postwar agreement. The first five points aimed to prevent conflict. Nations were asked to avoid secret treaties, to practice free trade, and to reduce their weapon supplies. Wilson asked that new borders be drawn based on self-determination, or the will of the people in each area.
Points 6 through 13 described new boundaries for many European countries. Finally, the ambitious Point 14 called for nations to join a general association of countries to protect each other’s independence. Wilson called this organization the League of Nations. With the League of Nations, Wilson believed, the world could achieve a lasting peace.
Germany had surrendered, believing that Wilson’s “Fourteen Points” would be the basis for a fair and just peace. But after years of fighting and dreadful losses, some
Allied leaders were not satisfied with a just peace.
The Treaty of Versailles On January 18, 1919, delegates from dozens of countries assembled at a French palace outside Paris called Versailles (vehr-SIGH). In addition to Wilson, three Allied leaders dominated the treaty talks. They were David Lloyd George of England, Georges Clemenceau (kleh-mahn-SOH) of France, and Vittorio Orlando of Italy.
The German representatives were not allowed to speak. This reflected the Allies’ anger and their determination to punish Germany and remove it as a future threat. They created a treaty that forced Germany to disband almost all of its armed forces, give up its colonies, and surrender territory in Europe. In addition, they called on Germany to pay reparations, or money to make up for damages and war deaths. The amount of these reparations was later set at $33 billion.
This painting shows the signing ofthe peace treaty that ended World War I. The treaty dealt harshly with Germany and planted the seeds of resentment that would lead to World War II.
The United States Becomes a World Power
Woodrow Wilson toured the country seeking public supportforthe League of Nations, which Congress opposed. When he suffered a massive stroke, he was unable to continue his fight and the Senate refused to approve the Treaty of Versailles.
President Wilson opposed such harsh treatment of Germany. However, he eventually accepted the Allied leaders’ demands for punishment in order to win their support for his Fourteen Points.
The Allies rejected some of Wilson’s points, including freedom of the seas. But the peace conference did create new national boundaries in Europe based on self-determination. Most important to Wilson, the Treaty of Versailles established a League of Nations. Wilson thought that this agreement would make the peace treaty successful. The League of Nations, he believed, could fix any problems created by the treaty.
Struggling for Senate Ratification Wilson needed the approval of two-thirds of the U.S. Senate to ratify the peace treaty. He quickly ran into opposition, especially to the League of Nations. Some senators worried that other countries would force U.S. soldiers to fight in international conflicts. They argued that only Congress had the constitutional power to send Americans to war.
The struggle over the treaty became a fight between political parties. Republicans held a majority in the Senate. They felt that Wilson, a Democrat, had made his Fourteen Points a political issue by not appointing any Republicans to his negotiating team.
Anxious to increase public support for the League of Nations, Wil' son undertook an intense speaking tour. In 22 days, he toured 29 cities. He spoke up to four times a day, with hardly any rest. Finally, he collapsed with severe headaches. He was rushed back to Washington, D-C-> where he suffered a massive stroke.
Recovering slowly, Wilson was less willing or able to compromise with opposition senators. In March 1920, the Senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles.
568 Chapter 28
A Return to Isolationism Once again, the United States was heading toward a policy of isolationism. When the League of Nations opened in Geneva, Switzerland, the United States did not participate In later years, when crises developed in Europe, the League lacked the power that Wilson hoped it would have.
In Germany, the Treaty of Versailles left a bitter legacy. Germans-notably Adolf Hitler, a corporal who had been temporarily blinded by gas during the war—felt betrayed by the treaty. Hitler’s rise to power in the 1930s would pose a fresh challenge to U.S. isolationism. Only after a second world war would the United States take on the role of world power that it continues to fill today.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter, you read about U.S. expansionism and the nation’s involvement in World War I.
Ihe Nation Stretches Its Wings Ihe United States’ first great expansion after the Civil War was the purchase of Alaska. Ihe nation also expanded westward by annexing the Midway Islands in the Pacific in 1867 and Hawaii in 1898.
Ihe Spanish-American War In 1898, the United States declared war with Spain over the Cuban struggle for independence. As a result of the Spanish-American War, the United States gained two new possessions: Puerto Rico and the Philippines. Although the nation did not take over Cuba, it did, under a treaty made in 1903, lease land in Cuba to establish a naval base.
Panama and the Canal In Central America, the United States encouraged revolution in Panama and then purchased a strip of land from the new country in order to build the Panama Canal. The United States maintained control over the Canal Zone for the rest of the 20th century.
World War I By the time World War I broke out, the United States was becoming a world power. America remained neutral until late in the war, when it entered the conflict on the side of the Allied Powers. President Wilson described the war as a fight to make the world safe for democracy.
A New Kind of Warfare World War I saw great changes in how war was conducted. The war in the west was fought from two parallel lines of trenches that eventually stretched for 600 miles across France. Machine guns and chemical weapons added to the horrors of trench warfare. German U-boats, or submarines, sank vessels on sight.
The Struggle for Peace Americans helped to win the war, but Wilson was unable to get all of his peace plan adopted. The U.S. Senate refused to ratify the peace treaty, preventing the United States from joining the League of Nations. In Europe, the harsh terms imposed by the victorious Allies caused great bitterness in Germany. Meanwhile, the United States turned back toward isolationism.
The United States Becomes a World Power 5i
Reading Further
By the early 1900s, when this photograph was taken, William Randolph Hearst was building the nation's first great media empire. Hearst was just 32 when he bought the New York Journal in 1895.
The Yellow Press Goes to War
In the late 1890s, an intense battle raged in New York City. William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer waged a "newspaper war" to dominate the city's news business. They relied on yellow journalism, printing sensational stories to attract readers and sell newspapers. In the process, they stirred passions that helped lead to a real war, the Spanish-American War.
William Randolph Hearst needed a good story. His newspaper, the New York Journal, was gaining on the city’s top paper, the New York World. But he needed a spectacular, front-page story to grab readers’ attention and sell more papers. In the summer of 1897, he got his break.
On August 17, Hearst’s correspondent in Cuba reported that Spanish officials there had thrown a young woman into jail. The story had all the elements Hearst was looking for. The woman, Evangelina Cisneros, was the daughter of a Cuban rebel fighting Spanish rule. She was 18 years old, beautiful, and appeared to be innocent. Now, the correspondent reported, she was being held in a filthy dungeon with hardened criminals. Hearst splashed her story across the front page. He called for an end to Spanish abuses and freedom for the Cuban people.
Hearst went even further. He began a petition drive, calling on women everywhere to protest the Spanish action. Many prominent women signed up, including President McKinley’s mother.
Hearst also launched a daring operation to free Cisneros. He sent a reporter to Cuba as a secret agent. In a dramatic, late-night prison break, the agent freed Cisneros and helped her escape to New York. Hearst gave her a thunderous welcome, including a parade down Fifth Avenue and a giant rally at Madison Square Garden. “Evangelina Cisneros Rescued by the Journal,” trumpeted the paper’s front-page headline.
Hearst s critics accused him of a hoax, saying that Spanish authorities had allowed Cisneros to escape. Meanwhile, Hearst took full advantage of the publicity and his role in making history. He was proud of what he called “journalism that acts.” “It does not wait for things to turn up,” he bragged proudly. He had a sensational story. Good had triumphed over evil—at least in Hearst’s version. Newspaper sales soared.
The Power of the Press
The Cisneros story was typical of Hearst’s approach to the news business. Newspapers were very important in the late 1800s. In the days before radio and television, they were the main news medium. They p ayed a key role in making news and influencing public opinion.
New York was the nation s leading newspaper town. With a population of almost 3 million people, it had 15 daily papers with a total
570 Chapter 28
circulation of nearly 2 million copies a day. Other cities, such as Boston, Chicago, and Philadelphia, also had a thriving press. But New York papers set the agenda for much of the nation’s news.
By 1897, the two most popular papers in New York were Hearst’s Journal and Joseph Pulitzer’s World. Locked in a battle for readership, they used a dramatic style of writing called yellow journalism to boost their appeal. In fact, it was their rivalry that gave birth to the term.
The Rise of Yellow Journalism
Hearst, the son of a wealthy mining baron, had bought the Journal in 1895. Although it was a small paper at the time, he was determined to make it big. He changed the layout to feature large, catchy headlines and striking illustrations. He filled the pages with society gossip and shocking stories about crime, corruption, and scandal.
The Journal, like the World, presented itself as a force for truth, justice, and the rights of the common man. It cast its reporters as brave heroes who solved crimes and rooted out corruption. To compete with Pulitzer, Hearst was willing to pay more for good stories. As a result, many journalists left the World and came to work for Hearst.
One of those who moved was the cartoonist R. F. Outcault. His popular cartoon “Hogan’s Alley” featured a street kid who dressed in a bright yellow nightshirt. The “Yellow Kid’s” antics delighted readers and made the cartoon a big hit for the World. That is, it did until the Yellow Kid moved to the Journal.
To fight back, Pulitzer produced another version of the cartoon. Suddenly, there were two Yellow Kids in the Sunday papers. People began to refer to the World and the Journal as the “yellow papers. And the style of the papers—brash, bold, and sensational—became known as yellow journalism. Yellow journalism became the style in many papers around the country, but the Journal and the World set the pattern.
The Granger Collection, NewYork
JTONTO ME WMUMD!
<'WrriNoi*
AT
The Yellow Kid played a key role in the newspaper war between Hearst and Pulitzer. As the main character in New York's most popular cartoon, he boosted sales of both the Journal and the World.


.<7l*l2|

fcswssr.'
New Yorkers could purchase the city’s 15 daily newspapers at newsstands around the city. Americans atthetime read newspapers—lots of them. In the late 1800s, about 14,000 weekly and 1,900 daily papers were published in the United States.
5j
New Yorkers could read bulletins about the war's progress on the front of the Journal's building as well as in its bold headlines. The Journal and other yellow papers helped push the country toward war. But they were just one factor. Many Americans were opposed to colonial rule, and some hoped to annex Cuba to the United States.
!	I i
I

3
In their quest for readers, the Journal and the World were both drawn to the rebellion in Cuba. Hearst, in particular, used the Cuban conflict to boost sales. He clearly believed in the Cuban cause. But he also saw the conflict as a good story that could help him win his circulation war with Pulitzer.
The Journal ran a steady stream of articles that painted the Cuban revolt in black-and-white terms. The Cuban rebels were noble patriots seeking liberty. The Spanish rulers were heartless villains trying to deny Cubans their freedom. In printing these stories, Hearst had one goal in mind: to push the United States into war.
In fact, many of the stories that came out of Cuba were false or exaggerated. Spanish officials allowed reporters little access to the fighting. As a result, many correspondents based their stories on flimsy evidence or on no evidence at all.
In 1897, Hearst published a series of stories that raised the pressure for war. The Cisneros story was one of these. Another concerned a search of three Cuban women on an American ship in Havana harbor. A third reported that a Cuban American doctor had been murdered in a Cuban jail. None of these stories was entirely accurate, but they all raised a storm of protest in the United States.
More stories followed. Early in 1898, the Journal reported that a riot in Havana was directed at American citizens, when in fact it was not. Then the paper reported on the contents of a stolen letter from the Spanish ambassador, in which the official called President McKinley weak. The headline read, “The Worst Insult to the United States in Its History. Again, readers were outraged. But that story was soon pushed aside by a much bigger event.
On February 15, the U.S.S. Maine blew up in Havana harbor. Although the cause of the blast was unknown, both Hearst and Pulitzer blamed Spain. “Destruction of the War Ship Maine Was the Work of
572 Chapter 28
an Enemy, read the Journal s headline. Other inflammatory stories followed. Hearst even published a card game called “War with Spain.”
Two months later, Hearst got his wish. Congress declared war on Spain. On the Journal's front page, Hearst gloated, “How Do You Like the Journals War?”
Hearst at the Front
Contrary to his claims, Hearst did not cause the Spanish-American War. Although the Journal and other yellow papers built public support for the war, they did not make it happen. They were just one factor in a set of circumstances that led to war.
Hearst was brilliant at self-promotion, however, and he knew that war was good for newspaper sales. In fact, circulation figures continued to rise. As the war began, both the Journal and the World were selling more than a million copies a day.
Hearst made sure his paper was at the center of the action. He sent dozens of correspondents to Cuba to report on the war. He even offered to organize and equip a regiment to fight in Cuba. When President McKinley declined his offer, Hearst proposed sending his own yacht to Cuba as a military vessel. The navy accepted this offer, though it rejected Hearst’s request to command the ship.
Denied the chance to fight in Cuba, Hearst went as a reporter. He fitted out a ship with food and medical supplies and sailed to Cuba with some of his staff. There, he filed several stories from the front lines. He took his reporting duties seriously, though he sometimes got in the way of the fighting. At one point, soldiers warned him off the battlefield.
Meanwhile, the Journal and the World continued their own battle for readership. They sometimes stole each other’s stories, rewriting them and claiming them as their own. They also accused each other of publishing false stories. At times, they paid more attention to their own squabbles than to the war itself.
Both papers spent a lot of money on the war, however. In fact, they spent far more than they made back in sales. By the war’s end, they were deeply in debt. To cut their losses, Pulitzer and Hearst agreed to cease their newspaper war. They toned down their papers, thus ending the golden age” of yellow journalism.
The two men continued to leave their mark on the news business. Pulitzer funded the country s first journalism school, at Columbia University. He also lent his name to the Pulitzer Prizes, journalism’s top awards. Hearst went on to build a giant media empire, which included radio and film companies.
He continued to shape the news for years to come.
Students from Columbia University's School of Journalism, founded by Joseph Pulitzer, celebrate their graduation. Today's journalists work in a wide range of media from television and the Internetto newspapers like Joseph Pulitzer's.
* - ')
The United States Becomes a World Power 573j
