chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 early in the 1700s tens of thousands of embittered scots irish nally abandoned ireland and came to america chiey to tolerant and deep soiled pennsylvania.
finding the best acres already taken by germans and quakers they pushed out onto the frontier making them among the rst settlers of the american west.
there many of them illegally but deantly squatted on unoccupied lands and quarreled with both indian and white owners.
when the westward owing scots irish tide lapped up against the allegheny barrier it was deected southward into the backcountry of maryland down virginias shenandoah valley and into the western carolinas.
their often rickety settlements bore the marks of scots irish restlessness.
whereas their german neighbors typically erected sturdy homes and cleared their elds meticulously the scots irish satised themselves with oorless imsy log cabins.
as betted an uprooted questing people they chopped down trees planted crops between the stumps exhausted the soil swiftly and moved on.
already experienced colonizers and agitators in ireland the scots irish proved to be superb frontiersmen though their readiness to visit violence on the indians repeatedly inamed the western districts.
by the mid eighteenth century a chain of scots irish settlements lay scattered along the great wagon road which hugged the eastern appalachian foothills from pennsylvania to georgia.
it was said somewhat unfairly that the scots irish kept the sabbath and all else they could lay their hands on.
pugnacious lawless and individualistic they brought with them the scottish secrets of whiskey distilling and dotted the appalachian hills and hollows with their stills.
they cherished no love for the british government that had uprooted them and still lorded over them or for any other government it seemed.
they led the armed march of the paxton boys on philadelphia in 1764 protesting the quaker oligarchys lenient policy toward the indians and a few years later spearheaded the regulator movement in north carolina a small but nasty insurrection against eastern domination of the colonys affairs.
many of these hotheads including the young andrew jackson eventually joined the embattled american revolutionaries.
all told about a dozen future presidents were of scots irish descent.
approximately 5 percent of the multicolored colonial population consisted of other european groups.
these embraced french huguenots welsh dutch swedes jews irish swiss and scots highlanders as distinguished from the scots irish.
except for the scots 49 english 19 african scottish 7 german 7 5 scots irish irish 3 dutch 3 other european 9 figure 5 1 ethnic and racial composition of the american people 1790 based on surnames.
source adapted from the american council of learned societies report of committee on linguistic and national stocks in the population of the united states 1932.
percentages total more than 100 percent due to rounding.
highlanders such hodgepodge elements felt little loyalty to the british crown.
by far the largest single noneng lish group was african accounting for nearly 20 percent of the colonial population in 1775 and heavily concentrated in the south.
the population of the thirteen colonies though mainly anglo saxon was perhaps the most mixed to be found anywhere in the world see figure 5 1.
the south holding about 90 percent of the slaves already the young frenchman michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur 1735 1813 wrote of the diverse population in about 1770 they are a mixture of english scotch irish french dutch germans and swedes.
from this promiscuous breed that race now called americans have arisen.
i could point out to you a family whose grandfather was an englishman whose wife was dutch whose son married a french woman and whose present four sons have now four wives of different nations.
colonial social classes displayed its historic black and white racial composition.
new eng land mostly staked out by the original puritan migrants showed the least ethnic diversity.
the middle colonies especially pennsylvania received the bulk of later white immigrants and boasted an astonishing variety of peoples.
outside of new eng land about one half the population was non eng lish in 1775.
of the fty six signers of the declaration of independence in 1776 eighteen were non eng lish and eight had not been born in the colonies.
as these various immigrant groups mingled and intermarried they laid the foundations for a new multicultural american national identity unlike anything known in europe.
the french settler michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur saw in america in the 1770s a strange mixture of blood which you will nd in no other country and he posed his classic question what then is the american this new man nor were white colonists alone in creating new societies out of diverse ethnic groups.
the african slave trade long had mixed peoples from many different tribal backgrounds giving birth to an african american community far more variegated in its cultural origins than anything to be found in africa itself.
similarly in the new eng land praying towns where indians were gathered to be christianized and in great lakes villages such as detroit home to dozens of different displaced indigenous peoples polyglot native american communities emerged blurring the boundaries of individual tribal identities.
the structure of colonial society in comparison to contemporary europe eighteenthcentury america seemed like a shining land of equality and opportunity with the notorious exception of slavery.
no titled nobility dominated society from on high and no pauperized underclass threatened it from below.
most white americans and even a handful of free blacks were small farmers.
clad in buckskin breeches they owned modest holdings and tilled them with their own hands and horses.
the cities contained a small class of skilled artisans with their well greased leather aprons as well as shopkeepers tradespeople and some unskilled day laborers.
the most remarkable feature of the social ladder was its openness.
an ambitious colonist even a former indentured servant could rise from a lower rung to a higher one a rare step in old eng land.
yet in contrast with seventeenth century america colonial society on the eve of the revolution was beginning to show signs of stratication and barriers to mobility that raised worries about the europeanization of america.
the gods of war contributed to these developments.
the armed con icts of the 1690s and early 1700s had enriched a number of merchant princes in the new eng land and middle colonies.
they laid the foundations of their fortunes with prots made as military suppliers.
roosting regally atop the social ladder these elites now feathered their nests more nely.
they sported imported clothing and dined at tables laid with eng lish china and gleaming silverware.
prominent individuals came to be seated in churches and schools according to their social rank.
by midcentury the richest 10 percent of bostonians and philadelphians owned nearly two thirds of the taxable wealth in their cities.
the plague of war also created a class of widows and orphans who became dependent for their survival on charity.
both philadelphia and new york built almshouses in the 1730s to care for the destitute.
yet the numbers of poor people remained tiny compared to the numbers in eng land where about a third of the population lived in impoverished squalor.
in the new eng land countryside the descendants of the original settlers faced more limited prospects than had their pioneering forebears.
as the supply of unclaimed soil dwindled and families grew existing landholdings were repeatedly subdivided.
the average size of farms shrank drastically.
younger sons as well as daughters were forced to hire out as wage laborers or eventually to seek virgin tracts of land beyond the alleghenies.
by 1750 boston contained a large number of homeless poor who were supported by public charity and compelled to wear a large red p on their clothing.
in the south the power of the great planters continued to be bolstered by their disproportionate ownership of slaves.
the riches created by the growing slave population in the eighteenth century were not distributed evenly among the whites.
wealth was concentrated in the hands of the largest slaveowners widening the gap between the prosperous gentry and the poor whites who were more and more likely to become tenant farmers.
in all the colonies the ranks of the lower classes were further swelled by the continuing stream of indentured servants many of whom ultimately achieved prosperity and prestige.
two became signers of the declaration of independence.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 present in a heavy concentration of resentful slaves and attempted to restrict or halt their importation.
but the british authorities seeking to preserve the supply of cheap labor for the colonies especially the west indies sugar plantations repeatedly vetoed all efforts to stem the transatlantic trafc in slaves.
many north american colonists condemned these vetoes as morally callous although new eng land slave traders beneted handsomely from the british policy.
the cruel complexity of the slavery issue was further revealed when thomas jefferson himself a slaveholder assailed the british vetoes in an early draft of the declaration of independence but was forced to withdraw the proposed clause by a torrent of protest from southern slavemasters.
clerics physicians and jurists a south carolina advertisement for slaves in the 1760s note the reference to these slaves origin on west africas rice coast a reminder of south carolinas reliance on african skill and labor for rice cultivation.
note too that half the slaves were said to have survived smallpox and thus acquired immunity from further infection and that care had been taken to insulate the others from a smallpox epidemic apparently then raging in charleston.
far less fortunate than the voluntary indentured servants were the paupers and convicts involuntarily shipped to america.
altogether about fty thousand jayle birds were dumped on the colonies by the london authorities.
this riffraff crowd including robbers rapists and murderers was generally sullen and undesirable and not bubbling over with goodwill for the kings government.
but many convicts were the unfortunate victims of circumstances and of a viciously unfair eng lish penal code that included about two hundred capital crimes.
some of the deportees in fact came to be highly respectable citizens.
least fortunate of all of course were the black slaves.
they enjoyed no equality with whites and dared not even dream of ascending or even approaching the ladder of opportunity.
oppressed and downtrodden the slaves were americas closest approximation to europes volatile lower classes and fears of black rebellion plagued the white colonists.
some colonial legislatures notably south carolinas in 1760 sensed the dangers most honored of the professions was the christian ministry.
in 1775 the clergy wielded less inuence than in the early days of massachusetts when piety had burned more warmly.
but they still occupied a position of high prestige.
most physicians on the other hand were poorly trained and not highly esteemed.
not until 1765 was the rst medical school established although european centers attracted some students.
aspiring young doctors served for a while as apprentices to older practitioners and were then turned loose on their victims bleeding was a favorite and frequently fatal remedy when the physician was not available a barber was often summoned.
cotton mather 1663 1728 puritan clergyman and avid scientist became frustrated with boston residents opposition to inoculation during the boston smallpox epidemic of 1721.
he wrote to a doctor friend never till now was that rule contested of two evils choose the least.
i would ask them whether it be not a most criminal ingratitude unto the god of health when he has acquainted us with a most invaluable method of the saving of our lives from so great a death to treat with neglect and contempt and multiply abuses on them who thankfully and in a spirit of obedience to him embrace his blessings.
the colonial economy epidemics were a constant nightmare.
especially dreaded was smallpox which af icted one out of ve persons including the heavily pockmarked george washington.
a crude form of inoculation was introduced in 1721 despite the objections of many physicians and some of the clergy who opposed tampering with the will of god.
powdered dried toad was a favorite prescription for smallpox.
diphtheria was also a deadly killer especially of young people.
one epidemic in the 1730s took the lives of thousands.
this grim reminder of their mortality may have helped to prepare many colonists in their hearts and minds for the religious revival that was soon to sweep them up.
at rst the law profession was not favorably regarded.
in this pioneering society which required much honest manual labor the parties to a dispute often presented their own cases in court.
lawyers were commonly regarded as noisy windbags or troublemaking rogues an early connecticut law classed them with drunkards and brothel keepers.
when future president john adams was a young law student the father of his wife to be frowned upon him as a suitor because of his chosen profession.
workaday america agriculture was the leading industry involving about 90 percent of the people.
tobacco continued to be the staple crop in maryland and virginia though wheat cultivation also spread through the chesapeake often on lands depleted by the overgrowth of tobacco.
the fertile middle bread colonies produced large quantities of grain and by 1759 new york alone was exporting eighty thousand barrels of our a year.
seemingly the farmer had only to tickle the soil with a hoe and it codshing in newfoundland ca.
1760 early european explorers were awed by the enormous schools of cod on the grand banks off newfoundland.
fish were so numerous that they sometimes impeded the progress of sailing vessels.
by the eighteenth century new englanders were aggressively exploiting the apparently limitless grand banks shery drying and salting huge catches for export to europe and the west indies.
two centuries later the accumulated predation of generations of overshing threatened to extinguish the once fabulous grand banks cod population.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 n 45 portsmouth n s boston s albany newport new london s n 40 new york w 70 s 50 100 km.
philadelphia s baltimore 100 mi.
atlantic of 1 ocean ation line 75w norfolk sea industries fishing whaling lam n oc forest industries pr new bern lumber and timber shipbuilding n naval stores general industries iron works n ft augusta charleston savannah rum distilleries n s s trading and shipping agriculture and trapping s cattle and grain tobacco 80w 30n rice and indigo furs and skins map 5 2 the colonial economy by the eighteenth century the various colonial regions had distinct economic identities.
the northern colonies grew grain and raised cattle harvested timber and sh and built ships.
the chesapeake colonies and north carolina were still heavily dependent on tobacco whereas the southernmost colonies grew mostly rice and indigo.
cotton so important to the southern economy in the nineteenth century had not yet emerged as a major crop.
interactive map would laugh with a harvest.
overall americans probably enjoyed a higher standard of living than the masses of any country in history up to that time.
fishing including whaling though ranking far below agriculture was rewarding.
pursued in all the american colonies this harvesting of the sea was a major industry in new eng land which exported smelly shiploads of dried cod to the catholic countries of europe.
the shing eet also stimulated shipbuilding and served as a nursery for the seamen who manned the navy and merchant marine.
a bustling commerce both coastwise and overseas enriched all the colonies especially the new england group new york and pennsylvania see map 5 2.
commercial ventures and land speculation in the absence of later get rich quick schemes were the surest avenues to speedy wealth.
yankee seamen were famous in many climes not only as skilled mariners but as tightsted traders.
they provisioned the caribbean sugar islands with food and forest products.
they also hauled spanish and portuguese gold wine and oranges to london to be exchanged for industrial goods which were then sold for a juicy prot in america.
the so called triangular trade was infamously protable though small in relation to total colonial commerce see map 5 3.
a skipper for example would leave a new eng land port with a cargo of rum and sail to the gold coast of africa.
bartering the ery liquor with african chiefs for captured african slaves he would proceed to the west indies with his sobbing and suffocating cargo sardined below deck.
there he would exchange the survivors for molasses which he would then carry to new eng land where it would be distilled into rum.
he would then repeat the trip making a handsome prot on each leg of the triangle.
manufacturing in the colonies was of only secondary importance although there was a surprising variety of small enterprises.
as a rule workers could get ahead faster in soil rich america by tilling the land.
huge quantities of kill devil rum were distilled in rhode island and massachusetts and even some of the elect of the lord developed an overfondness for it.
handsome beaver hats were manufactured in quantity despite british restrictions.
smoking iron forges including pennsylvanias valley forge likewise dotted the land and in fact were more numerous in 1775 though generally smaller than those of eng land.
in addition household manufacturing including spinning and weaving by women added up to an impressive output.
as in all pioneering countries strong backed laborers and skilled craftspeople were scarce and highly colonial commerce prized.
in early virginia a carpenter who had committed a murder was freed because his woodworking skills were needed.
lumbering was perhaps the most important single manufacturing activity.
countless cartloads of freshfelled timber were consumed by shipbuilders at rst chiey in new eng land and then elsewhere in the colonies.
by 1770 about four hundred vessels of assorted sizes were splashing down the ways each year and about one third of the british merchant marine was american built.
colonial naval stores such as tar pitch rosin and turpentine were highly valued for britain was anxious to gain and retain a mastery of the seas.
london offered generous bounties to stimulate production of these items otherwise britain would have had to turn to the uncertain and possibly hostile baltic areas.
towering trees ideal as masts for his majestys navy were marked with the kings broad arrow for future use.
the luckless colonist who was caught cutting down this reserved timber was subject to a ne.
even though there were countless unreserved trees and the blazed ones were being saved for the common defense this shackle on free enterprise engendered considerable bitterness.
americans held an important ank of a thriving many sided atlantic economy by the dawn of the eighteenth century.
yet strains appeared in this complex network as early as the 1730s.
fast breeding americans map 5 3 colonial trade patterns ca.
1770 future president john adams noted about this time that the commerce of the west indies is a part of the american system of commerce.
they can neither do without us nor we without them.
the creator has placed us upon the globe in such a situation that we have occasion for each other 100w hudson 80w bay 60w 40w s ve s guadeloupe lve si r ru cartagena south america 1000 mi.
es sl av es peru bahia potos o rs e h ns f wi ruit ne e win mediterra ne an sea tropic of cancer africa s sla major trade route lisbon cadiz n ivory coast gold coast slave coast brazil lima intercoastal trade route cts t silver m barbados slav major points of trade ea du uc rop ro np po r t u g al madeira islands rod es europe dp 500 1000 km.
ss e c tu re ola eu martinique pac i f ic oc ean equator s ug m ar hispaniola n caribbean d i e s sea gold 0 las great britain london n eth er l an ds bristol manuf a i mo r fr e sla t s a ug ses s 20e glasgow spa i n uit sugar gold c of fe e es jamaica slaves m olasse ric w 20n cuba tock lives fish r lumber ses olas flou es m slav charleston 0 li n l stores rs nava ctured fish fu manufa cts cts rodu produ cts red p newport boston produ factu d u re n a tu m fac new york manu cco meat fish rum philadelphia toba lumber grain english manufactu o red colonies indig w i ne products rice furs 40n interactive map 20w at l a n t i c o c ea n north america ves luanda at l a n t i c o c ea n angola chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 demanded more and more british products yet the slow growing british population early reached the saturation point for absorbing imports from america.
this trade imbalance raised a question how could the colonists sell the goods to make the money to buy what they wanted in britain.
the answer was obvious by seeking foreign non british markets.
by the eve of the revolution the bulk of chesapeake tobacco was lling pipes in france and in other european countries though it passed through the hands of british re exporters who took a slice of the prots for themselves.
more important was the trade with the west indies especially the french islands.
west indian purchases of north american timber and foodstuffs provided the crucial cash for the colonists to continue to make their own purchases in britain.
but in 1733 bowing to pressure from inuential british west indian planters parliament passed the molasses act aimed at squelching north american trade with the french west indies.
if successful this scheme would have struck a crippling blow to american international trade and to the colonists standard of living.
american merchants responded to the act by bribing and smuggling their way around the law.
thus was foreshadowed the impending imperial crisis when headstrong americans would revolt rather than submit to the dictates of the far off parliament apparently bent on destroying their very livelihood.
horsepower and sailpower all sprawling and sparsely populated pioneer communities are cursed with oppressive problems of transportation.
america with a scarcity of both money and workers was no exception.
not until the 1700s did roads connect even the major cities and these dirt thoroughfares were treacherously decient.
a wayfarer could have rumbled along more rapidly over the roman highways in the days of julius caesar nearly two thousand years earlier.
it took young benjamin franklin nine long rain drenched days in 1720 to journey from boston to philadelphia traveling by sailing sloop rowboat and foot.
news of the declaration of independence in 1776 reached charleston from philadelphia twenty nine days after the fourth of july.
roads were often clouds of dust in the summer and quagmires of mud in the winter.
stagecoach travelers braved such additional dangers as tree strewn roads sign of the pine tree inn 1768 inns like joseph read iiis in lisbon connecticut not only provided food drink shelter and entertainment for colonial americans but also were raucous arenas for debating political issues.
this sign with its circular yellow orb sun over a pine tree may have been intended as a veiled reference to the sons of liberty an extralegal resistance organization that had adopted as its symbol the liberty tree.
the date of 1768 coincided with the british enactment of the townshend acts which ignited a new wave of colonial resistance to british rule.
colonial religion rickety bridges carriage overturns and runaway horses.
a traveler venturesome enough to journey from philadelphia to new york for example would not think it amiss to make a will and pray with the family before departing.
where man made roads were wretched heavy reliance was placed on god grooved waterways.
population tended to cluster along the banks of navigable rivers.
there was also much coastwise trafc and although it was slow and undependable it was relatively cheap and pleasant at least in fair weather.
taverns sprang up along the main routes of travel as well as in the cities.
their attractions customarily included such amusements as bowling alleys pool tables bars and gambling equipment.
before a cheerful roaring log re all social classes would mingle including the village loafers and drunks.
the tavern was yet another cradle of democracy.
gossips also gathered at the taverns which were clearinghouses of information misinformation and rumor frequently stimulated by alcoholic refreshment and impassioned political talk.
a successful politician like the wire pulling samuel adams was often a man who had a large alehouse fraternity in places like bostons green dragon tavern.
taverns were important in crystallizing public opinion and proved to be hotbeds of agitation as the revolutionary movement gathered momentum.
an intercolonial postal system was established by the mid 1700s although private couriers remained.
some mail was handled on credit.
service was slow and infrequent and secrecy was problematic.
mail carriers serving long routes would sometimes pass the time by reading the letters entrusted to their care.
dominant denominations two established or tax supported churches were conspicuous in 1775 see table 5 1 the anglican and the congregational.
a considerable segment of the population surprisingly enough did not worship in any church.
and in those colonies that maintained an established religion only a minority of the people belonged to it see table 5 2.
the church of eng land whose members were commonly called anglicans became the ofcial faith in georgia north and south carolina virginia maryland and a part of new york.
established also in england it served in america as a major prop of kingly table 5 1 established tax supported churches in the colonies 1775 colonies massachusetts incl.
maine connecticut new hampshire new york maryland virginia north carolina south carolina georgia rhode island new jersey delaware pennsylvania churches year disestablished congregational anglican in new york city and three neighboring counties anglican none note the persistence of the congregational establishment in new eng land.
table 5 2 estimated religious census 1775 name congregationalists anglicans presbyterians german churches incl.
lutheran dutch reformed quakers baptists roman catholics methodists jews est.
total membership est.
total population percentage church members number chief locale 575 000 500 000 410 000 new eng land n y south frontier 200 000 75 000 40 000 25 000 pa n y n j pa n j del.
r i pa n j del.
scattered n y r i 25 000 5 000 2 000 1 857 000 2 493 000 74 chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 authority.
british ofcials naturally made vigorous attempts to impose it on additional colonies but they ran into a stone wall of opposition.
in america the anglican church fell distressingly short of its promise.
secure and self satised like its parent in eng land it clung to a faith that was less erce and more worldly than the religion of puritanical new eng land.
sermons were shorter hell was less scorching and amusements like virginia fox hunting were less scorned.
so dismal was the reputation of the anglican clergy in seventeenth century virginia that the college of william and mary was founded in 1693 to train a better class of clerics.
the inuential congregational church which had grown out of the puritan church was formally established in all the new eng land colonies except independent minded rhode island.
at rst massachusetts taxed all residents to support congregationalism but later relented and exempted members of other well known denominations.
presbyterianism though closely associated with congregationalism was never made ofcial in any colonies.
ministers of the gospel turning from the bible to this sinful world increasingly grappled with burning political issues.
as the early rumblings of revolution against the british crown could be heard sedition owed freely from pulpits.
presbyterianism congregationalism and rebellion became a neo trinity.
many leading anglican clergymen aware of which side their tax provided bread was buttered on naturally supported their king.
benjamin franklins 1706 1790 poor richards almanack contained such thoughts on religion as these a good example is the best sermon many have quarreled about religion that never practiced it serving god is doing good to man but praying is thought an easier service and therefore more generally chosen how many observe christs birthday how few his precepts.
tis easier to keep holidays than commandments.
anglicans in the new world were seriously handicapped by not having a resident bishop whose presence would be convenient for the ordination of young ministers.
american students of anglican theology had to travel to eng land to be ordained.
on the eve of the revolution there was serious talk of creating an american bishopric but the scheme was violently opposed by many non anglicans who feared a tightening of the royal reins.
this controversy poured holy oil on the smoldering res of rebellion.
religious toleration had indeed made enormous strides in america at least when compared with its halting steps abroad.
roman catholics were still generally discriminated against as in eng land even in ofceholding.
but there were fewer catholics in america and hence the anti papist laws were less severe and less strictly enforced.
in general people could worship or not worship as they pleased.
the great awakening in all the colonial churches religion was less fervid in the early eighteenth century than it had been a century earlier when the colonies were rst planted.
the puritan churches in particular sagged under the weight of two burdens their elaborate theological doctrines and their compromising efforts to liberalize membership requirements.
churchgoers increasingly complained about the dead dogs who droned out tedious overerudite sermons from puritan pulpits.
some ministers on the other hand worried that many of their parishioners had gone soft and that their souls were no longer kindled by the hell re of orthodox calvinism.
liberal ideas began to challenge the old time religion.
some worshipers now proclaimed that human beings were not necessarily predestined to damnation and might save themselves by leading a life of good works.
most threatening to the calvinist doctrine of predestination was arminianism named after the dutch theologian jacobus arminius who preached that individual free will not divine decree determined a persons eternal fate and that all humans not just the elect could be saved if they freely accepted gods grace.
pressured by these heresies a few churches grudgingly conceded that spiritual conversion was not necessary for church membership.
together these twin trends toward clerical intellectualism and lay liberalism were sapping the spiritual vitality from many denominations.
the stage was thus set for a rousing religious revival.
known as the great awakening it exploded in religious revivals george whiteeld preaching americans of both genders and all races and regions were spellbound by whiteelds emotive oratory.
the 1730s and 1740s and swept through the colonies like a re through prairie grass.
the awakening was rst ignited in northampton massachusetts by a tall delicate and intellectual pastor jonathan edwards.
perhaps the deepest theological mind ever nurtured in america edwards proclaimed with burning righteousness the folly of believing in salvation through good works and af rmed the need for complete dependence on gods grace.
warming to his subject he painted in lurid detail the landscape of hell and the eternal torments of the damned.
sinners in the hands of an angry god was the title of one of his most famous sermons.
he believed that hell was paved with the skulls of unbaptized children edwardss preaching style was learned and closely reasoned but his stark doctrines sparked a warmly sympathetic reaction among his parishioners in 1734.
four years later the itinerant eng lish parson george whiteeld loosed a different style of evangelical preaching on america and touched off a conagration of religious ardor that revolutionized the spiritual life of the colonies.
a former alehouse attendant whiteeld was an orator of rare gifts.
his magnicent voice boomed sonorously over thousands of enthralled listeners in an open eld.
one of eng lands greatest actors of the day commented enviously that whiteeld could make audiences weep merely by pronouncing the word mesopotamia and that he would give a hundred guineas if i could only say o like mr whiteeld jonathan edwards 1703 1758 preached hellre notably in one famous sermon the god that holds you over the pit of hell much as one holds a spider or some loathsome insect over the re abhors you and is dreadfully provoked.
his wrath toward you burns like re he looks upon you as worthy of nothing else but to be cast into the re.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 triumphally touring the colonies whiteeld trumpeted his message of human helplessness and divine omnipotence.
his eloquence reduced jonathan edwards to tears and even caused the skeptical and thrifty benjamin franklin to empty his pockets into the collection plate.
during these roaring revival meetings countless sinners professed conversion and hundreds of the saved groaned shrieked or rolled in the snow from religious excitation.
whiteeld soon inspired american imitators.
taking up his electrifying new style of preaching they heaped abuse on sinners and shook enormous audiences with emotional appeals.
one preacher cackled hideously in the face of hapless wrongdoers.
another naked to the waist leapt frantically about in the light of ickering torches.
orthodox clergymen known as old lights were deeply skeptical of the emotionalism and the theatrical antics of the revivalists.
new lights on the other hand defended the awakening for its role in revitalizing american religion.
congregationalists and presbyterians split over this issue and many of the believers in religious conversion went over to the baptists and other sects more prepared to make room for emotion in religion.
the awakening left many lasting effects.
its emphasis on direct emotive spirituality seriously undermined the older clergy whose authority had derived from their education and erudition.
the schisms it set off in many denominations greatly increased the number and the competitiveness of american churches.
it encouraged a fresh wave of missionary work among the indians and even among black slaves many of whom also attended the mass open air revivals.
it led to the founding of new light centers of higher learning such as princeton brown rutgers and dartmouth.
perhaps most signicant the great awakening was the rst spontaneous mass movement of the american people.
it tended to break down sectional boundaries as well as denominational lines and contributed to the growing sense that americans had of themselves as a single people united by a common history and shared experiences.
schools and colleges a time honored eng lish idea regarded education as a blessing reserved for the aristocratic few not for the unwashed many.
education should be for leadership not citizenship and primarily for males.
only slowly and painfully did the colonists break the chains of these ancient restrictions.
puritan new eng land largely for religious reasons was more zealously interested in education than any other section.
dominated by the congregational church it stressed the need for bible reading by the individual worshiper.
the primary goal of the clergy was to make good christians rather than good citizens.
a more secular approach was evident late in the eighteenth century when some children were warned in the following verse he who neer learns his a b c.
forever will a blockhead be.
but he who learns his letters fair shall have a coach to take the air.
education principally for boys ourished almost from the outset in new eng land.
this densely populated region boasted an impressive number of graduates from the eng lish universities especially cambridge the intellectual center of eng lands puritanism.
new eng landers at a relatively early date established primary and secondary schools which varied widely in the quality of instruction and in the length of time that their doors remained open each year.
back straining farm labor drained much of a youths time and energy.
fairly adequate elementary schools were also hammering knowledge into the heads of reluctant scholars in the middle colonies and in the south.
some of these institutions were tax supported others were privately operated.
the south with its white and black population diffused over wide areas was severely handicapped by geography in attempting to establish an effective school system.
wealthy families leaned heavily on private tutors.
john adams ca.
1736 1826 the future second president wrote to his wife the education of our children is never out of my mind.
i must study politics and war that my sons may have the liberty to study mathematics and philosophy.
my sons ought to study mathematics and philosophy geography natural history naval architecture navigation commerce and agriculture in order to give their children a right to study painting poetry music architecture statuary tapestry and porcelain.
education and culture table 5 3 colonial colleges name 1.
harvard william and mary yale princeton pennsylvania columbia brown rutgers dartmouth begun as an indian missionary school original name if different college of new jersey the academy kings college rhode island college queens college location cambridge mass.
williamsburg va new haven conn princeton n j philadelphia pa new york n y providence r i new brunswick n j hanover n h.
the general at mosphere in the colonial schools and colleges continued grim and gloomy.
most of the emphasis was placed on religion and on the classical languages latin and greek.
the focus was not on experiment and reason but on doctrine and dogma.
the age was one of orthodoxy and independence of thinking was discouraged.
discipline was quite severe with many a mischievous child being sadistically birched with a switch cut from a birch tree.
sometimes punishment was in icted by indentured servant teachers who could themselves be whipped for their failures as workers and who therefore were not inclined to spare the rod.
opened or founded denomination congregational anglican congregational presbyterian nonsectarian anglican baptist dutch reformed congregational college education at least at rst in new england was geared toward preparing men for the ministry.
after all churches would wither if a new crop of ministers was not adequately trained to lead the regions spiritual ocks.
annoyed by this exclusively religious emphasis many well to do families especially in the south sent their boys abroad to acquire a real meaning a re ned and philosophical education in elite eng lish institutions.
for purposes of convenience and economy nine local colleges were established during the colonial era see table 5 3.
student enrollments were small numbering about two hundred boys at the most and at one the college of new jersey at princeton 1764 later known as princeton university it was chartered in 1746 by the presbyterian synod though open to students of all religious persuasions.
the fourth college to be founded in british north america it met in elizabeth and newark new jersey until a gift of ten acres of land precipitated a move to princeton in 1756.
all classes were held in the large building nassau hall.
here the continental congress met for three months during the summer of 1783 making princeton for a short time the capital of the nation.
this copper engraving based on a drawing by one of princetons earliest students was part of a series of college views that reected colonial americans growing pride in institutions of higher learning.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 time a few lads as young as eleven were admitted to harvard.
instruction was poor by present day standards.
the curriculum was still heavily loaded with theology and the dead languages although by 1750 there was a distinct trend toward live languages and other modern subjects.
a signicant contribution was made by benjamin franklin.
he had never attended college but played a major role in launching what became the university of pennsylvania the rst american college free from denominational control.
a provincial culture when it came to art and culture colonial americans were still in thrall to european tastes especially british.
the simplicity of pioneering life had not yet bred many homespun patrons of the arts.
one aspiring painter john trumbull 1756 1843 of connecticut was discouraged in his youth by his fathers chilling remark connecticut is not athens like so many of his talented artistic contemporaries trumbull was forced to travel to london to pursue his ambitions.
charles willson peale 1741 1827 best known for his portraits of george washington ran a museum stuffed birds and practiced dentistry.
gifted benjamin west 1738 1820 and precocious john singleton copley 1738 1815 succeeded in their ambitions to become famous painters but like trumbull they had to go to eng land to complete their training.
only abroad could they nd subjects who had the leisure to sit for their portraits and the money to pay handsomely for them.
copley was regarded as a loyalist during the revolutionary war and west a close friend of george iii and ofcial court painter was buried in londons st pauls cathedral.
architecture was largely imported from the old world and modied to meet the peculiar climatic and religious conditions of the new world.
even the lowly log cabin was apparently borrowed from sweden.
the red bricked georgian style so common in the prerevolutionary decades was introduced around 1720 and is best exemplied by the beauty of now restored williamsburg virginia.
colonial literature like art was generally undistinguished and for many of the same reasons.
one noteworthy exception was the precocious poet phillis wheatley ca.
1753 1784 an enslaved girl brought to boston at age eight and never formally educated.
taken to eng land when twenty years of age she published a book of verse and subsequently wrote other polished poems that revealed the inuence of alexander pope.
colonial craftsmanship in the pennsylvania dutch country parents gave daughters painted wooden chests to hold their precious dowry linens at marriage.
the horsemen unicorns and ower patterns on this dower chest conrm its origins in berks county pennsylvania.
her verse compares favorably with the best of the poetry poor colonial period but the remarkable fact is that she could overcome her severely disadvantaged background and write any poetry at all.
versatile benjamin franklin often called the rst civilized american also shone as a literary light.
although his autobiography is now a classic he was best known to his contemporaries for poor richards almanack which he edited from 1732 to 1758.
this famous publication containing many pithy sayings culled from the thinkers of the ages emphasized such homespun virtues as thrift industry morality and common sense.
examples are what maintains one vice would bring up two children plough deep while sluggards sleep honesty is the best policy and fish and visitors stink in three days poor richards was well known in europe and was more widely read in america than anything except the bible.
dispensing witty advice to old and young alike franklin had an incalculable inuence in shaping the american character.
science rising above the shackles of superstition was making some progress though lagging behind that of the old world.
a few botanists mathematicians and astronomers had won some repute but benjamin franklin was perhaps the only rst rank scientist produced in the american colonies.
franklins spectacular but dangerous experiments including the famous kiteying episode proving that lightning was a form of the press and politics the magnetic dispensary ca.
1790 this british painting made sport of the eras faddish preoccupations with electricity.
following franklins experiments static electricity generated here by the machine on the right was employed for medicinal purposes as well as for tingling entertainments.
electricity won him numerous honors in europe.
but his mind also had a practical turn.
among his numerous inventions were bifocal spectacles and the highly efcient franklin stove.
his lightning rod perhaps not surprisingly was condemned by some stodgy clergymen who felt it was presuming on god by attempting to control the artillery of the heavens pioneer presses stump grubbing americans were generally too poor to buy quantities of books and too busy to read them.
a south carolina merchant in 1744 advertised the arrival of a shipment of printed books pictures maps and pickles a few private libraries of fair size could be found especially among the clergy.
the byrd family of virginia enjoyed perhaps the largest collection in the colonies consisting of about four thousand volumes.
bustling benjamin franklin established in philadelphia the rst privately supported circulating library in america and by 1776 there were about fty public libraries and collections supported by subscription.
hand operated printing presses cranked out pamphlets leaets and journals.
on the eve of the revolution there were about forty colonial newspapers chiey weeklies that consisted of a single large sheet folded once.
columns ran heavily to somber essays frequently signed with such pseudonyms as cicero philosophicus and pro bono publico for the public good.
the news often lagged many weeks behind the event especially in the case of overseas happenings in which the colonists were deeply interested.
newspapers proved to be a powerful agency for airing colonial grievances and rallying opposition to british control.
a celebrated legal case in 1734 1735 involved john peter zenger a newspaper printer.
signicantly the zenger trial arose in new york reecting the tumultuous give and take of politics in the middle colonies where so many different ethnic groups jostled against one another.
zengers newspaper had assailed the corrupt royal governor.
charged with seditious libel the accused was hauled into court where he was defended by a former indentured servant now a distinguished philadelphia lawyer andrew hamilton.
zenger argued that he had printed the truth but the bewigged royal chief justice instructed the jury not to consider the truth or falsity of zengers statements the mere fact of printing irrespective of the truth was enough to convict.
hamilton countered that the very liberty of both exposing and opposing arbitrary power was at stake.
chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 andrew hamilton ca.
1676 1741 concluded his eloquent plea in the zenger case with these words the question before the court and you gentlemen of the jury is not of small nor private concern.
it is not the cause of a poor printer nor of new york alone which you are now trying.
it may in its consequence affect every freeman that lives under a british government on the main land of america.
it is the best cause.
it is the cause of liberty.
swayed by his eloquence the jurors deed the bewigged judges and daringly returned a verdict of not guilty.
cheers burst from the spectators.
the zenger decision was a banner achievement for freedom of the press and for the health of democracy.
it pointed the way to the kind of open public discussion required by the diverse society that colonial new york already was and that all america was to become.
although contrary to existing law and not immediately accepted by other judges and juries in time it helped establish the doctrine that true statements about public ofcials could not be prosecuted as libel.
newspapers were thus eventually free to print responsible criticisms of powerful ofcials though full freedom of the press was unknown during the prerevolutionary era.
the great game of politics american colonists may have been backward in natural or physical science but they were making noteworthy contributions to political science.
the thirteen colonial governments took a variety of forms.
by 1775 eight of the colonies had royal governors who were appointed by the king.
three maryland pennsylvania and delaware were under proprietors who themselves chose the governors.
and two connecticut and rhode island elected their own governors under self governing charters.
practically every colony utilized a two house legislative body.
the upper house or council was normally appointed by the crown in the royal colonies and by the proprietor in the proprietary colonies.
it was chosen by the voters in the self governing colonies.
the lower house as the popular branch was elected by the people or rather by those who owned enough property to qualify as voters.
in several of the colonies the backcountry elements were seriously underrepresented and they hated the ruling colonial clique perhaps more than they did kingly authority.
legislatures in which the people enjoyed direct representation voted such taxes as they chose for the necessary expenses of colonial government.
self taxation through representation was a precious privilege that americans had come to cherish above most others.
governors appointed by the king were generally able men sometimes outstanding gures.
some unfortunately were incompetent or corrupt broken down politicians badly in need of jobs.
the worst of the group was probably impoverished lord cornbury rst cousin of queen anne who was made governor of new york and new jersey in 1702.
he proved to be a drunkard a spendthrift a grafter an embezzler a religious bigot and a vain fool who was accused probably inaccurately of dressing like a woman.
even the best appointees had trouble with the colonial legislatures basically because the royal governor embodied a bothersome transatlantic authority some three thousand miles away.
the colonial assemblies found various ways to assert their authority and independence.
some of them employed the trick of withholding the governors salary unless he yielded to their wishes.
he was normally in need of money otherwise he would not have come to this godforsaken country so the power of the purse usually forced him to terms.
but one governor of north carolina died with his salary eleven years in arrears.
the london government in leaving the colonial governor to the tender mercies of the legislature was guilty of poor administration.
in the interests of simple efciency the british authorities should have arranged to pay him from independent sources.
as events turned out control over the purse by the colonial legislatures led to prolonged bickering which proved to be one of the persistent irritants that generated a spirit of revolt.
administration at the local level was also varied.
county government remained the rule in the plantation south town meeting government predominated in new eng land and a modication of the two developed in the middle colonies.
in the town meeting with parliament nally arranged for separate payment of the governors through the townshend taxes of 1767 but by then the colonists were in such an ugly mood over taxation that this innovation only added fresh fuel to the ames.
governance in the colonies junius the pseudonym for a critic or critics of the british government from 1768 to 1772 published a pointed barb in criticizing one new appointee it was not virginia that wanted a governor but a court favorite that wanted a salary.
its open discussion and open voting direct democracy functioned at its best.
in this unrivaled cradle of selfgovernment americans learned to cherish their privileges and exercise their duties as citizens of the new world commonwealths.
yet the ballot was by no means a birthright.
religious or property qualications for voting with even stiffer qualications for ofceholding existed in all the colonies in 1775.
the privileged upper classes fearful of democratic excesses were unwilling to grant the ballot to every biped of the forest perhaps half of the adult white males were thus disfranchised.
but because of the ease of acquiring land and thus satisfying property requirements the right to vote was not beyond the reach of most industrious and enterprising colonists.
yet somewhat surprisingly eligible voters often did not exercise this precious privilege.
they frequently acquiesced in the leadership of their betters who ran colonial affairs though always reserving the right to vote misbehaving rascals out of ofce.
by 1775 america was not yet a true democracy socially economically or politically.
but it was far more democratic than eng land and the european continent.
colonial institutions were giving freer rein to the democratic ideals of tolerance educational advantages equality of economic opportunity freedom of speech freedom of the press freedom of assembly and representative government.
and these democratic seeds planted in rich soil were to bring forth a lush harvest in later years.
colonial folkways everyday life in the colonies may now seem glamorous especially as reected in antique shops.
but judged by modern standards it was drab and tedious.
for most people the labor was heavy and constant from can see to cant see food was plentiful though the diet could be coarse and monotonous.
americans probably ate more boun tifully especially of meat than any people in the old world.
lazy or sickly was the person whose stomach was empty.
basic comforts now taken for granted were lacking.
churches were not heated at all except for charcoal foot warmers that the women carried.
during the frigid new eng land winters the preaching of hell re may not have seemed altogether unattractive.
drafty homes were poorly heated chiey by inefcient replaces.
there was no running water in the houses no indoor plumbing and probably not a single bathtub in all of colonial america.
candles and whale oil lamps provided faint and ickering illumination.
garbage disposal was primitive.
long snouted hogs customarily ranged the streets to consume refuse while buzzards protected by law apped greedily over tidbits of waste.
amusement was eagerly pursued where time and custom permitted.
the militia assembled periodically for musters which consisted of several days of drilling liberally interspersed with merrymaking and irting.
on the frontier plea sure was often combined with work at house raisings quilting bees husking bees and apple parings.
funerals and weddings every where afforded opportunities for social gatherings which customarily involved the swilling of much strong liquor.
winter sports were common in the north whereas in the south card playing horse racing cockghting and fox hunting were favorite pastimes.
george washington not surprisingly was a superb rider.
in the nonpuritanical south dancing was the rage jigs square dances the virginia reel and the agile washington could swing his fair partner with the best of them.
other diversions beckoned.
lotteries were universally approved even by the clergy and were used to raise money for churches and colleges including harvard.
stage plays became popular in the south but were frowned upon in quaker and puritan colonies and in some places forbidden by law.
many of the new england clergy saw playacting as time consuming and immoral they preferred religious lectures from which their ocks derived much spiritual satisfaction.
holidays were every where celebrated in the american colonies but christmas was frowned upon in new eng land as an offensive reminder of popery yuletide is fooltide was a common puritan sneer.
thanksgiving day came to be a truly american festival for it combined thanks to god with an opportunity for jollication gorging and guzzling.
by the mid eighteenth century britains several north american colonies despite their differences chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 the popular game of billiards most likely brought over by dutch and english settlers billiards provided amusement in local taverns throughout the colonies.
by the nineteenth century americans like the british and french who had long dominated the sport had become obsessed with these games of cues and balls.
the most popular form of pool eight ball was not invented until 1900 revealed some striking similarities.
all were basically eng lish in language and customs and protestant in religion while the widespread presence of other peoples and faiths compelled every colony to cede at least some degree of ethnic and religious toleration.
compared with contemporary europe they all afforded to enterprising individuals unusual opportunities for social mobility.
they all possessed some mea sure of selfgovernment though by no means complete democracy.
communication and transportation among the colo nies were improving.
british north america by 1775 looked like a patchwork quilt each part slightly different but stitched together by common origins common ways of life and common beliefs in toleration economic development and above all self rule.
fatefully all the colonies were also separated from the seat of imperial authority by a vast ocean moat some three thousand miles wide.
these simple facts of shared history culture and geography set the stage for the colonists struggle to unite as an independent people.
chronology college of william and mary founded princeton college founded yale college founded britain vetoes south carolina anti slave trade mea sures smallpox inoculation introduced first edition of franklins poor richards almanack paxton boys march on philadelphia brown college founded rutgers college founded jonathan edwards begins great awakening 1734 1768 regulator protests zenger free press trial in new york dartmouth college founded george whiteeld spreads great awakening varying viewpoints key terms people to know paxton boys 90 regulator movement 90 triangular trade 94 molasses act 96 arminianism 98 great awakening 98 old lights 100 new lights 100 poor richards almanack 102 zenger trial 103 royal colonies 104 proprietary colonies 104 michel guillaume jean de crvecoeur jacobus arminius jonathan edwards george whiteeld john trumbull john singleton copley phillis wheatley john peter zenger colonial america communities of conict or consensus.
t he earliest historians of colonial society portrayed close knit homogeneous and hierarchical communities.
richard bushmans from puritan to yankee 1967 challenged that traditional view when he described colonial new eng land as an expanding opening society.
in this view the colonists gradually lost the religious discipline and social structure of the founding generations as they poured out onto the frontier or sailed the seas in search of fortune and adventure.
rhys isaac viewed the great awakening in the south as similar evidence of the erosion of the social constraints and deference that once held colonial society together.
unbridled religious enthusiasm directed by itinerant preachers both north and south encouraged the sort of quest for personal autonomy that eventually led americans to demand national independence.
other scholars have focused on the negative aspects of this alleged breakdown in the traditional order particularly on the rise of new social inequalities.
social historians like kenneth lockridge have argued that the decline of cohesive communities population pressure on the land and continued dominance of church and parental authority gave rise to a landless class forced to till tenant plots in the countryside or nd work as manual laborers in the cities.
gary nash in the urban crucible 1979 likewise traced the rise of a competitive individualistic social order in colonial cities marking the end of the patronage and paternalism that had once bound communities together.
increasingly nash contended class antagonisms split communities.
the wealthy abandoned their traditional obligations toward the poor for more selsh capitalistic social relations that favored their class peers.
the consequent politicization of the laboring classes helped motivate their participation in the american revolution.
some scholars have disputed that declension undermined colonial communities.
christine heyrman in particular has argued in commerce and culture 1984 that the decline of traditional mores has been overstated religious beliefs and commercial activities coexisted throughout the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
similarly jack greene has suggested that the obsession with the decline of deference has obscured the fact that colonies outside of new england like virginia and maryland actually experienced a consolidation of religious and social authority throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries becoming more hierarchical and paternalistic.
like greene many historians have focused on sectional differences between the colonies and the peculiar nature of social equality and inequality in each.
much of the impetus for this inquiry stems from an issue that has long perplexed students of early america the simultaneous evolution of a rigid racial caste system alongside democratic political institutions.
decades ago when most historians came from yankee stock they resolved the apparent paradox by locating the seeds of democracy in new eng land.
the aggressive independence of the people best expressed by the boisterous town meetings spawned chapter 5 colonial society on the eve of revolution 1700 1775 the american obsession with freedom.
on the other hand this view holds the slave societies of the south were hierarchical aristocratic communities under the sway of a few powerful planters.
more recently some historians have attacked this simple dichotomy noting many undemocratic features in colonial new eng land and arguing that while the south may have been the site of tremendous inequality it also produced most of the founding fathers.
washington jefferson and madison the architects of american government with its foundation in liberty all hailed from slaveholding virginia.
in fact nowhere were republican principles stronger than in virginia.
some scholars notably edmund s morgan in american slavery american freedom 1975 consider the willingness of wealthy planters to concede the equality and freedom of all white males a device to ensure racial solidarity and to mute class con ict.
in this view the concurrent emergence of slavery and democracy was no paradox.
white racial solidarity mufed animosity between rich and poor and fostered the devotion to equality among whites that became a hallmark of american democracy.
histori ans of latin america point out that other new world societies like brazil and mexico had far sharper class divisions than the british colonies with lasting consequences for their social integrity and political stability.
few historians still argue that the colonies offered boundless opportunities for inhabitants white or black.
but scholars disagree vigorously over what kinds of inequalities and social tensions most shaped eighteenth century society and contributed to the revolutionary agitation that eventually consumed and transformed colonial america.
even so whether one accepts morgans argument that americans bought their independence with slave labor or those interpretations that point to rising social con ict between whites as the salient characteristic of colonial society on the eve of the revolution the oncecommon assumption that america was a world of equality and consensus no longer reigns undisputed.
yet because ones life chances were still unquestionably better in america than in europe immigrants continued to pour in imbued with high expectations about america as a land of opportunity.
to learn more bernard bailyn the peopling of british north america 1986 richard l bushman from puritan to yankee character and social order in connecticut 1690 1765 1967 king and people in provincial massachusetts 1985 john butler becoming america the revolution before 1776 2000 benjamin franklin autobiography 1868 james henretta the evolution of american society 1700 1815 1973 rhys isaac landon carters uneasy kingdom revolution and rebellion on a virginia plantation 2004 jill lepore new york burning 2005 william moraley the infortunate the voyage and adventures of william moraley edited by susan klepp 1992 marcus rediker between the devil and the deep blue sea merchant seamen pirates and the anglo american maritime world 1700 1750 1987 gordon wood the americanization of benjamin franklin 2004 a complete annotated bibliography for this chapter along with brief descriptions of the people to know and additional review materials may be found at the duel for north america 1608 1763 a torch lighted in the forests of america set all europe in conagration.
a s the seventeenth century neared its sunset a titanic struggle was shaping up for mastery of the north american continent.
the contest involved three old world nations eng land france and spain and it unavoidably swept up native american peoples as well.
from 1688 to 1763 four bitter wars convulsed europe.
all four of those con icts were world wars.
they amounted to a death struggle for domination in europe as well as in the new world and they were fought on the waters and soil of two hemispheres.
counting these rst four clashes nine world wars have been waged since 1688.
the american people whether as british subjects or as american citizens proved unable to stay out of a single one of them.
and one of those wars known as the seven years war in europe and sometimes as the french and indian war in america set the stage for americas independence.
after the union of eng land and scotland in 1707 the nations ofcial name became great britain france finds a foothold in canada like eng land and holland france was a latecomer in the scramble for new world real estate and for basically the same reasons.
it was convulsed during the 1500s by foreign wars and domestic strife including the frightful clashes between roman catholics and protestant huguenots.
on st bartholomews day 1572 over ten thousand huguenots men women and children were butchered in cold blood.
a new era dawned in 1598 when the edict of nantes issued by the crown granted limited toleration to french protestants.
religious wars ceased and in the new century france blossomed into the mightiest and most feared nation on the european continent led by a series of brilliant ministers and by the vainglorious king louis xiv.
enthroned as a ve year old boy he reigned for no less than seventy two years 1643 1715 surrounded by a glittering court and scheming this icon will direct you to interactive activities and study materials on the american pageant website.
