Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change
182
182
iWhdelii
i
i
MAP 18-1A
and MAP 18-1B Expanding Southern Railroads, 1859-1899. Map 1A at top illustrates the extent of railroad lines in 1859 on the eve of the Civil War. Map 1B illustrates the expansion of rail lines by 1899. Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
or three times during a long life, can now go quickly, safely, pleasantly and cheaply several times a day. Farms were connected to towns, and towns to cities beyond the imaginings of people’s parents and grandparents.
The railroads that brought people to town also brought goods from around the world while shipping goods that the South produced to world markets. Country stores sold manufactured goods that made life easier and fertilizer that made the land more productive.
In many small towns, stores also sold goods on credit, making them virtually banks. In this capacity, stores also accepted fields planted in cotton as collateral for loans, as cotton remained the prime cash crop of the South.
In addition to cotton, new industries were growing in the South in the 1880s. Sawmills and turpentine camps produced lumber and turpentine that was shipped around the world. Phosphate mining expanded but was then eclipsed by coal mining as new markets demanded coal. Tobacco, which the South had shipped to the world since the 1600s, became a growth industry. Using effective advertising and marketing skills, Julian Carr shipped his Bull Durham tobacco bags worldwide, and Washington Duke and his son James shipped prerolled cigarettes that quickly became the most popular way to enjoy “clean, quick, and potent” tobacco. Iron and steel were produced at the South’s fastest growing city of Birmingham. The South’s textile production, which had involved 10,000 people in 1870 (as it had in 1850), employed almost 100,000 by 1900. Finally, a new product, Coca-Cola, developed by Asa G. Candler in 1889, became highly popular and, eventually, a drink of choice for many on every continent.
Nostalgia and Celebration of the "Lost Cause"
The rapid changes in the South made some uneasy. The movement of Southerners—white and black—in search of jobs and economic opportunities created a sense of dislocation. C. L. Pettigrew of North Carolina, like many others, remembered a slower pace and complained about “that striving, rough and eager crowd.” Others mourned to see “the white-columned porticos of the favorite colonial architecture now maundering in decay,” as ambitious young people moved to opportunities elsewhere.
Simmering in the South were deep generational tensions between Confederate veterans and those who had been born too late to remember the war. A Texas veteran wrote to the legislature, asking them to be sure that “the sons of Confederates and the public generally” remember the Lost Cause. Another ex-Confederate, Wade Hampton, insisted, “I believe now, as always, that the South was right.” For veterans like Hampton and others and for Southern widows of those who had died in the war, the memory of the “Lost Cause” as a glorious time and a righteous fight made the pain of a sometimes lonely and often economically challenging present more bearable.
Southern writers produced romantic stories of the “Lost Cause ’ of the Civil War and the days of slavery that preceded it. Thomas Nelson Page, of a prominent Virginia family, created the “plantation school of writing, recounting tales of a chivalrous past. Page also started the tradition of the wise and loyal slave, who, Page told his white read-
ers, longed for the days before the war when everyone had a secure place in a well-ordered society. The most famous author of the plantation school, Joel Chandler Harris, created the fictional elderly black man, Uncle Remus, and his animal alter-ego, Brer Rabbit. The Uncle Remus stories first published in the Atlanta Constitution in 1879 and then as a popular book, portrayed the Old South as a romantic and happy place.
5 nt?
WJ


This ad from the 1890s introduces the new drink, Coca Cola, which was one of the many new industries that emerged in the South.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Chang<
Religion in the New South
Religion also played a crucial role in the post-Reconstruction South. Southerners did not actually attend church in greater numbers than their Northern counterparts, but religious imagery and biblical language were a strong part of the Souths culture. With the coming of freedom, Southern blacks quickly joined or established their own churches. By 1890, there were 1.3 million black Baptists in the South. Northern black churches, especially the African Methodist Episcopal and African Methodist Episcopal Zion denominations, also built churches for Southern blacks. Ihe black church became the place in the segregated South where former slaves could meet with a measure of safety, share and build and new communal identity, and control the intellectual and cultural life of their own institution.
White Southerners also gravitated to churches in the 1880s and 1890s. Baptist bodies were the largest group of white churches in the South, but the Methodists claimed almost as many members. Also strong were the Disciples of Christ, the Presbyterians, and in certain areas of the South, Episcopalians and Roman Catholics. In white and black churches, nearly all of the clergy were male, but women could play a large role in the churches, particularly through women’s associations and mission groups, which provided necessary support to these churches and through which women could exercise a level of autonomy.
A conductor evicts a well-dressed black man from a first-class coach. Enforcing segregation on the railroad coach was seen by many white southerners as somehow essential to protecting white women.
Creating the Segregated South
The railroads that knit the New South together quickly became the focus of the Souths great unresolved issue—race. Even though the political rights of African-Americans had been declining in the South since the defeat of Reconstruction in the 1870s, the South of the 1880s and early 1890s was not the rigidly segregated place it would become by 1900. Churches were segregated by custom and choice. Schools, hospitals, and hotels were generally segregated by law. Blacks were confined to the balcony in most theaters, and the races did not mix in restaurants. However, in many places of work, at many political gatherings, and in travel, blacks and whites could be found together in the South of the late 1800s. Ihe railroads were certainly not going to build separate lines or even run separate trains, and most railroads saw all talk of racial segregation as potentially troublesome and expensive. Nevertheless, trouble was brewing.
As passenger railroads developed in the South between 1865 and 1880, they generally offered two classes of service—a first-class car for women and men who did not smoke or chew tobacco, and a second-class car—often a section of the baggage car—for men who used tobacco or people too poor to buy a first-class ticket. In some cases, blacks were assumed to belong in the second-class car with the tobacco-using white men; however, in many cases, blacks rode first class without incident. In any case, a trip that might start without incident could quickly turn ugly. In the early 1880s, a black man was asked by the conductor to leave the first-class car after the train crossed the state line from Tennessee to Georgia. When he refused, he was badly beaten by other passengers. In 1889, a delegation from the first African Baptist Church of Savannah, Georgia, started their journey to a church convention in Indianapolis, Indiana, on the East Tennessee, Virginia and Georgia Railroad. The well-dressed delegates started out comfortably in first class, but they were met at a subsequent train stop by a mob of 50 white men with pistols and clubs who attacked them and threatened to “blow your G-d-d brains out.”
While the railroads did not want to take action, state legislatures did. In railroad cars, people of different races—and equally important,
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
genders might mix in especially close contact given the close seating. During the late 1800s, whites were developing an especially great fear of any contact between black men and white women. As one person wrote, a man “would be horrified at the idea of his wife or daughter seated by the side of a burly negro.” Tennessee was the first state to respond, enacting a law saying, “All railroad companies shall furnish separate cars, or portions of cars cut off by partition wall, which all colored passengers who pay first-class rates of fare may have the privilege to enter and occupy. The law seemed to imply that it was up to blacks whether they wanted to be segregated or not, but clearly that idea was not the way the arrangement worked. Across the South, trains were rigidly segregated a decade before the 1896 U.S. Supreme Court s 7-to-l decision in Plessy v. Ferguson declared that “separate but equal” transportation—and, by implication, other matters—did not violate the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

The Politics of Exclusion
The end of the racially integrated governments of the Reconstruction era and the almost complete exclusion of African-Americans from the political life of the South took place in two distinct stages between the 1870s and 1900. These stages are often merged in the popular mind as if they happened all at once, though they did not.
The first step in ending Reconstruction took place in the 1860s and 1870s (see Chapter 14). Black legislators and white legislators who supported them (all of whom were Republicans) were defeated by white Democratic segregationists at different times in different states, nearly always in elections marked by violence and voter intimidation. Virginia was the first to shift from a Republican to a Democratic legislature in 1869. Conservative Democrats soon also won large majorities in other states—North Carolina in 1870, Georgia in 1871, Texas in 1873, Alabama and Arkansas in 1874, and South Carolina and Mississippi in 1876. Finally, contested elections in Louisiana and Florida were awarded to the Democrats in 1877 as part of the same compromise that put Hayes in the White House. The withdrawal of most federal troops that the newly inaugurated Hayes ordered in 1877 was thus the culmination, not the cause of the end of Reconstruction.
However, the defeat of Reconstruction was not the end of the story. While every Southern state had a conservative Democratic legislature and governor after 1877, quite a few blacks still voted and some were still elected and appointed to public offices in the South for another decade. Black voters could provide the margin of victory in close contests. Most state legislatures had at least a few African-American representatives, and many federally appointed officials from postmasters to census officials were black. In 1891, as the Arkansas legislature was debating railroad segregation, it was a black legislator, John Gray Lucas, who objected. It was also a black delegate to Mississippi’s 1895 state constitutional convention, Thomas E. Miller, who told the majority that they needed to remember, “It was your love of power and your arrogance which brought Reconstruction on you.”
In most cases, the few black office holders remaining were too few in number to have an impact. Nevertheless, some whites objected to the close interactions that challenged racial and gender conventions in certain offices such as when a white woman visited the post office to be helped by a black male postmaster. When the Republicans won the White House and Congress in 1888, some white Southerners feared a repeat of Reconstruction, perhaps even the appointment of federal election officials who would monitor Southern election procedures. At the same time, a new generation of Southern whites were tired of the Klan-style violence that
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Chan'
18.1
18.2
183
accompanied elections. An 1889 article in the Jackson, Mississippi, Clarion-Ledger said, “The old men of the present generation can’t afford to die and leave the election to their children and grandchildren, with shot guns in their hands, a lie in their mouths and perjury on their lips in order to defeat the negroes. The solution to the election violence that the newspaper wanted was not to hold fair and race-neutral elections but, rather, to establish legal means to exclude all blacks from all political participation.
Fears of black political involvement grew in the 1890s when the Populist move-ment disrupted Southern politics. It was one thing for a handful of blacks in the state legislature to raise questions about a bill before the white majority voted for whatever it wanted. It was a different matter if the white Democratic majority was split between Populist and traditional factions and the black representatives had the tie-breaking votes or if, as happened in North Carolina, a Populist-Republican ticket, with black support, could actually win the majority of seats in a state legislature. In 1896, South Carolina’s arch-segregationist Governor Ben Tillman warned of an “unholy alliance between the independents and the negroes.”
For many Southern whites, the solution was a new set of laws that would ensure “white supremacy” forever. Political leaders called new state constitutional conventions to ensure that they secured absolute power. Blacks and their white allies had been marginalized by the violence and the voting that ended Reconstruction, but the new state constitutions of the 1890s moved from marginalization to complete exclusion. When the work of these new constitutional conventions was done, extremely few black voters and no black office holders remained anywhere in what came to be known as the “solid South,” which meant solidly white and Democratic.
Mississippi rewrote its state constitution in 1890, creating what looked like colorblind obstacles that would, in practice, stop all blacks from voting. The most obvious restrictions—a literacy test or a poll tax or a property qualification for voters—would also exclude many poor whites who were themselves illiterate and who could not meet a property qualification or pay a poll tax. So Mississippi’s delegates created a complex set of limitations on voting and office. To be able to vote, the new constitution said, a person had to have lived in the state for at least 2 years and in the election district for at least 1; a sharecropper who moved for a better chance at life thus lost the right to participate in elections at least for a time. Other states instituted “grandfather clauses” that said anyone whose grandfather had been a voter was exempt from other restrictions, a privilege no descendent of slaves could claim. Those intending to vote in Mississippi and elsewhere could not do so if they had been convicted of petty crimes such as arson, bigamy, or petty theft, crimes that blacks were routinely charged with. Ironically, conviction for murder, rape, or grand larceny did not exclude one from voting. The Mississippi convention did require a modest poll tax. Finally, the convention adopted a requirement that every voter be able to understand and interpret the state constitution. White state-appointed registrars would decide whose interpretation was “reasonable.” An editorial in the Jackson, Mississippi, Clarion-Ledger described the new system: “ [I] f every negro in Mississippi was a graduate of Harvard.. .he would not be as well fitted to exercise the right of suffrage as the Anglo-Saxon farm laborer.” Once the new Mississippi Constitution took effect, it had its intended impact. Once other Southern states observed what was happening in Mississippi, they too adopted the approach.
After the U.S. Supreme Court declared poll taxes and literacy tests to be constitutional in their 1898 ruling in Williams v. Mississippi, there was little chance that any Southern state would fail to enact such Mississippi-style voting tests. In 1908, Texas became the last state of the former Confederacy to add a poll tax, and across the region, that tax was usually one of several mechanisms that ended black voting.
Then, as though all of the new laws were not enough, a new form of violence toward African-Americans emerged in the late 1800s. Where the Kian and other groups had terrorized black communities during Reconstruction, the spectacle of
Part VI Becoming an industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
public lynching became widespread in the following years. Individual African-Americans, often young men, were singled out, often accused with little or no evidence of raping a white woman, and hung in a public spectacle. The issue was rarely an actual rape but, more often, a young black man’s failure to observe the customs of stepping out of the way for a white person to pass or a black man’s challenging the payment of a landowner at the sharecroppers settle, or a black man asserting his political rights. Most of all, lynching was a way to strike terror into the black community while asserting and celebrating white dominance. In 1900, the New South was fast becoming a region governed exclusively by white voters and white elected officials and would remain so until the black Civil Rights movement of the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s transformed the region and the nation.

I M2
Ml
African-American Responses
As the rigid segregation of “separate but equal,” which everyone knew meant separate and very unequal, settled on the South and, indeed, much of the country, especially after 1896, African-Americans debated how to respond to a legal system that excluded them from voting. In addition, they considered their response to being barred from access to quality schooling and to any but the most menial jobs as well as to being restricted from entering rail cars, hotels, or theaters that served whites. They also argued responses to cultural expectations that they “give way,” allowing whites to pass in front of them in stores and on sidewalks, that they call all whites by their last names while they were called by their first names by whites, and that they live with the oppressive knowledge that even the slightest challenge to segregation could be met with not only ostracism but also unimaginable violence.
Ida B. Wells (1862-1931) was one of the African-Americans who challenged the lynchings that were a key part of the violence used to maintain segregation. Between 1889 and 1918, 386 lynchings took place in Georgia, 373 in Mississippi, and similar numbers in several other states. Wells argued that the rape charge, which was often the excuse for lynching a black man, was a “thread-bare lie” and a cover for punishing any black man who challenged the rules of segregation. In response to her writing, a white mob destroyed her printing press at her Memphis Free Press, but throughout her life, she continued to write, publish, and organize legal challenges to segregation and especially its maintenance through the violence of lynchings.
In the face of the harsh reality of segregation and exclusion, Booker T. Washington (1856-1915), perhaps the nation’s best-known African-American leader, argued that it was time to adjust to segregation rather than challenge the laws and customs excluding blacks. Washington urged blacks to create an economic foundation for themselves. In the midst of the harsh realities of the 1890s, Washington’s course of action seemed the only realistic option.
Not all African-Americans agreed with Washington, and a young African-American scholar, W.E.B. Du Bois (1868-1963), became his harshest critic. Du Bois criticized compromises and wrote that “the problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line.” He described the kind of “double consciousness” or “twon-ess” that African-Americans were forced to develop in a country that proclaimed liberty but excluded them by law and custom.
In 1905, Du Bois joined other African-American leaders meeting at Niagara Falls-in a hotel on the Canadian side because no hotel on the American side would give them rooms—to begin a campaign for “every single right that belongs to a free-born American, political, civil, and social” without compromise. The Niagara Movement that emerged from the conference fought for an end to segregation and for full equality for African-Americans. Four years later, in February 1909, Du Bois, others from

hr


Ida B. Wells-Barnett became the most effective national spokesperson for the antilynching crusade.
Niagara Movement
African-American group organized in 1905 to promote racial integration, civil and political rights, and equal access to economic opportunity; the movement later helped organize the NAACP.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change
18.1
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Debating Booker T. Washington's "Cast Down Your Buckets Where You Are" Speech
On September 18, 1895, Booker T. Washington gave a speech to a mostly white audience at the Cotton States and International Exposition in Atlanta, Georgia. Washington came to the exposition at the height of his career to offer what came to be known as the Atlanta Compromise—that African-Americans would accept segregation in return for being able to develop economically. So Washington said:
To those of my race...l would say: "Cast down your bucket where you are"—cast it down in making friends in every manly way with the people of all races with whom we are surrounded. Cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic service, and in the professions....
In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress... .The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of social equality is the extremist folly, and that progress in the enjoyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing. No race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is long in any degree ostracized. It is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercise of these privileges. The opportunity to earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house.
At the time, the speech was greeted with great applause, most of all, on the part of Northern white philanthropists who poured money into Tuskegee and other ventures supported by Washington.
Eight years later in 1903, W.E. B. Du Bois published The Souls of
Black Folk. Du Bois was unsparing in his judgment, writing:
Mr. Washington represents in Negro thought the old
attitude of adjustment and submission......In answer
to this, it has been claimed that the Negro can survive only through submission. Mr. Washington distinctly asks that black people give up, at least for the present, three things—
First, political power,
Second, insistence on civil rights,
Third, higher education of Negro youth—
And concentrate all their energies on industrial education, the accumulation of wealth, and the conciliation of the South. This policy has been courageously and insistently advocated for over fifteen years, and has been triumphant for perhaps ten years. As a result of this tender of the palm-branch, what has been the return? In these years there have occurred:
1.	The disfranchisement of the Negro.
2.	The legal creation of a distinct status of civil inferiority for the Negro.
3.	The steady withdrawal of aid from institutions for the higher training of the Negro.
These movements are not, to be sure, direct results of Mr. Washington's teachings; but his propaganda has, without a shadow of doubt, helped their speedier accomplishment. The question then comes: Is it possible, and probable, that nine millions of men can make effective progress in economic lines if they are deprived of political rights, made a servile caste, and allowed only the most meager chance for developing their exceptional men?
Considering these quotes, the lines between Du Bois and Washington could not have been starker. In reality, they were not as stark as the two documents imply. Privately, Washington provided funds for court challenges of segregation and challenged lynchings, but unlike Du Bois, he had been born in slavery and lived and worked in Alabama in the heart of a segregated world. Du Bois, a generation younger, was raised in the North, and had much less patience with any form of accommodation. Nevertheless, between them, the two leaders outlined differences that remained in the African-American community for decades.
Source: Booker T. Washington, Up From Slavery: An Autobiography (New York: Doubleday-Page, 1901); W.E.B. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folk (Chicago: A.C. McClurg, 1903).
Thinking Critically
1.	Comparison
What do you see as the starkest differences between Washington and Du Bois?
2.	Contextualization
Why did Du Bois believe that economic and political progress for African-Americans were inextricably linked? Why did Washington think they could be separated?

in
516 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
the Niagara Movement, and additional African-American leaders, including Ida B. Wells, Mary McLeod Bethune, and Mary Church Terrell, joined with white reformers, including Jane Addams, John Dewey, Clarence Darrow, and Lincoln Steffens. They created the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (the NAACP) to fight for full enforcement of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments; bring public exposure and legal challenges to the mostly unpunished wave of lynchings that were happening in all parts of the country; and begin what would be a long, slow legal process of court challenges to the “separate but equal” laws that provided the legal foundation for black exclusion.
Atlanta Compromise
An 1895 proposal from BookerT. Washington that African-Americans remain separate from whites while focusing on economic self-help.
18.2
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)
An interracial organization founded in 1910 dedicated to restoring African-American political and social rights.
Quick Review Is "New South" an appropriate name for the society that emerged after Reconstruction? Consider the economics, politics, and social aspects of the region in formulating your answer.
THE POLITICS OF CONFLICT—FROM POPULIST MOVEMENT TO POPULIST PARTY
18.2
Analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on American politics.
In the 1870s and 1880s, American farmers were living very difficult lives. The work was backbreaking. They had no time for much of an education and far too little time for family or community life. The economic cycles seemed structured against them. Whenever farmers started to get ahead financially, they faced a downturn because of a glut of wheat in Russia or overproduction of cotton in Egypt or some other issue, leaving them in a pattern of debt. Even in good times, it seemed that the railroads and middlemen in New York or New Orleans or London or Paris took the profits that they produced. Perhaps most galling to many farmers was the sense that the rapid changes happening in the rest of the country seemed to be leaving them behind. It is not accidental that the derogatory word “hayseed,” entered the nations vocabulary at this time. Urban America saw itself as up to date and modern but saw farmers, living in isolated rural areas, as backward and out of date. Moreover, the new technologies that enabled rapid communication let these farmers know just what others in the country thought of them. Jefferson’s agrarian ideal seemed like part of a very dim past.
The Farmers7 Alliance and Other Farm Groups
By the beginning of the 1880s, many farmers were deeply in debt to the banks on which they depended for their mortgages and for loans to obtain equipment and supplies for the planting year. Railroads, that might give a break to John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil, kept raising the rates to haul farm products to market. By the time farmers paid off their loans and paid to get the wheat, corn, and other farm products to market, they had little, if any, money left. Eventually, farmers started to do something to change their circumstances. Nelson Dunning of the Farmers’ Alliance, wrote, “Nothing could withstand their power, if the farmers of America would organize,” particularly, as he believed, in ways the Standard Oil Company had done. In the Farmers’ Alliance and eventually in their own political party, farmers, who had indeed been observing what the Rockefellers and Carnegies of the nation were doing, tried to create their own power base.
The earliest nationwide farmer organization was the Patrons of Husbandry, also known as “the Grange.” Farmers gathered in Grange Halls to celebrate their work and foster a sense of community, but they also organized to deal with the chronic debt and the sense that the nation’s financial arrangements were stacked against them. Especially in the South, local Grange chapters organized cooperative buying and selling through their own cotton gins and warehouses, knowing that they would get better prices for their crops
The Grange
The National Grange, or the Patrons of Husbandry, a national organization of farmers formed after the Civil War to promote the rights and dignity of farmers.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change
5
The Grange, the first national farmers'organization, painted an idealized picture of farming. Later, farmers' organizations were less idealistic and more militant.
Agricultural Wheel
An organization of farmers, begun in Arkansas in 1882. More militant than the Grange, it sought to advance farmer's economic status.
Farmers'Alliance
A broad mass movement in the rural South and West during the late 1800s, encompassing several organizations and demanding economic and political reforms; it helped create the Populist Party.
and better rates from the railroads if they banded together. The national leadership of the Grange focused on lobbying for agricultural colleges, attracting more people to farming, encouraging crop diversity, and promoting a richer home life for farm families.
Farmers also started additional organizations. In 1882, Arkansas farmers launched the Agricultural Wheel. By 1885, the Agricultural Wheel had 1,105 local chapters in four states. Ihe Wheel became a tough organization that excluded any but working farmers. The organization used its size to negotiate price reductions with manufacturers of farm implements and got up to 50 percent reductions on the prices of wagons, buggies, reapers, and mowers, while organizing its own warehouses to hold crops until prices met expectations.
A number of similar organizations coordinated similar efforts, but the largest by far was the Farmers’ Alliance, which began as the Texas Alliance in Lampasas County, Texas, in the 1870s by ranchers who were dealing with issues of communal and private grazing lands. After Charles W. Macune was elected president of the Texas organization in 1886, the Alliance grew rapidly. Macune had trained as a pharmacist and a physician before he settled in Milam County Texas in 1879 where he practiced medicine while farming on the side. But his rural medical practice gave him a sense of the problems the ranchers and the farmers faced, particularly, the isolation and the lack of economic clout.
518 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Under Macune s leadership the Farmers’ Alliance became a business organization—organizing the farmers (including ranchers) of Texas, and eventually the nation, to use the best of corporate practices to fight with the organizations they saw oppressing them. The Alliance sought to get a better financial deal for farmers through the negotiating power of a large organization demanding lower prices for the things they bought and higher prices for the products they sold.
Ihe Texas Farmers’ Alliance grew from 38,000 members in 1886 to 225,000 members in 1889—almost half of all of the eligible farmers in Texas. In 1887, the Alliance merged with the Arkansas-based Agricultural Wheel and continued to grow with local units stretching from North Carolina to California and from Texas to the Dakotas. In 1890, Macune moved to a national headquarters in Washington, DC, and the Alliance had over 1 million members.
Under Macune’s leadership, the Farmers’ Alliance steered clear of direct political involvement. The goal of the Alliance was simple: farmers would combine their power to equal the power of other businesses. They were not opposed to monopolies; they wanted to be one. The Washington office published the National Economist, mailed to farmers across the country, while sponsoring lecturers, organizers, and corresponding secretaries to spread Alliance ideas. The organization sought to overcome rural isolation and lack of educational opportunities through lending libraries, schools, conferences, and social occasions for farm families. Most of all, the Alliance sought to open a “new era” of prosperity for farmers through tough negotiations on their behalf.
Macune believed that whites and blacks had different economic interests and insisted that the Farmers’ Alliance should include only white farmers. When the Agricultural Wheel joined the Alliance, it dropped its black members. In response to Macune’s segregationist policy, African-American farmers created their own Colored Farmers’ National Alliance and Cooperative Union that had 1.2 million members by 1890. Given the political and social disenfranchisement that black farmers faced, they organized primarily through black churches. In many communities, the black Baptist Church and the Colored Farmers’ Alliance had virtually the same membership. Lacking the resources to publish their own materials or hire lecturers or organizers, the black organization never had the clout of the white alliance, even though it had more members.
While the Farmers’ Alliance was racially segregated, it welcomed women as members and leaders, as did the Colored Farmers’ Alliance. Fully a quarter of the members of the Colored Farmers’ Alliance were women. In contrast to the Grange, which had special positions for women, the Farmers’ Alliance opened all positions to both women and men. Annie L. Diggs of Kansas was one of the senior editors of the National Reform Press Association, the white Alliance’s publishing house. Mary E. Lease of Kansas was the most famous of the Alliance’s many speakers, while Marion Todd of Illinois was considered to be the most effective theoretician for the movement. Bettie Munn Gay, who had turned a highly mortgaged Texas farm into a successful cotton growing operation, became one of the leaders in the Texas Alliance. Women and men within the Alliance debated women’s suffrage and occasionally argued over the prohibition of alcohol. But they were united in a commitment to improve the life of farm families, economically as well as intellectually and culturally, ending the terrible isolation that farm families experienced.
Defining a National Agenda
While Macune focused the Farmers’ Alliance on cooperative economic efforts and stayed out of electoral politics, other leaders wanted more direct political involvement. In California, the president of the state Farmers Alliance, Marion Cannon, became convinced after long battles with the Southern Pacific Railroad that only public ownership of the railroads would allow farmers to get a fair deal. Alliance lecturer Marion Todd published Railways of Europe and America in 1893 in which she argued for
I8J
IO
Colored Farmers' National Alliance and Cooperative Union
An organization of Southern black farmers formed in Texas in 1886 in response to the Southern Farmers'Alliance, which did not accept black people as members. It helped launch the Populist Party.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change
			
			18.2
		1	
American Voices
Mary E. Lease, Women in the Farmers’ Alliance, 1891
E-
Lease, a well-known speaker for the Farmers' Alliance, twt rose to national fame telling Kansas farmers to "raise less corn and more hell" and then traveling the nation to recruit members and build support for the organization. In 1891, she gave a speech to the National Council of Women of the United States, part of which is presented here. Madam President, Friends, and Fellow-Citizens,—I use that term with somewhat pardonable pride when I remember that the Alliance League of Kansas has given to the women of my sunflower, humanity-loving, temperance-loving State of Kansas the right of political suffrage.
The subject assigned to me to-day, Women in the Farmers' Alliance, cannot be intelligently discussed nor fully understood until the necessity for the formation of the Farmers' Alliance is first shown, and its aims and purposes briefly stated. It must be evident to every intelligent man and woman to-day that there is something radically wrong in the affairs of this Nation....
My friends, the lash of the slave-driver's whip is no longer heard in this country, but the lash of necessity is driving thousands to unrequited toil. Conscienceless capital is robbing manhood of its prime, mothers of their motherhood, and sorrowful children of sunshine and of joy. Look around you! What do you behold to-day? A land which less than four hundred years ago we received fresh from the hands of God, a continent of unparalleled fertility... and yet, in this land of plenty and unlimited resources, the cry of humanity is going up from every corner of this Nation. The plaint of motherhood, the moans of starving children! Capital buys and sells to-day the very heart-beats of humanity....
Oh, yes; we can point to the rivers bridged, to the transcontinental railway connecting ocean with ocean, to wonderful churches and cathedrals; he can point to the most wonderful system of agriculture that ever brought joy to a hungry world; he can jostle his rags against the silken garments his toil has secured; he can walk shelterless and sad by the side of the home he has helped to build; he can wipe the sweat from his weary face, and reflect that the twenty thousand of American millionaires who own one billion five hundred million dollars, gathered from the toils and tears of sixty-four millions of American people, have it in their power to name their Governors and our legislators and representatives and Congressmen — and they do name them, and they have named them for the last quarter of a century, and they have it in their power to fix the price of labor, to fix the price for every ton of coal.
Source: Mary E. Lease, Speech to the National Council of Women of the United States, Assembled in Washington, DC, Feb 24, 1891
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to Mary Lease, why was there a "necessity for the formation of the Farmers'Alliance," and what should be its political agenda?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What importance should we attach to the fact that a number of women, Mary Lease among them, played prominent roles in farmers'movements and the People's Party?
subtreasury system
A proposal fora unit of the U.S. Treasury Department (or "subtreasury") to own warehouses that would store farmer's crops until prices rose.
managing railways in ways similar to how the government managed post offices. Some in the Alliance wanted a federal commission to limit the power of the railroads, but Cannon and Todd were convinced that the railroads were too big to be tamed and that a government takeover was the only answer.
Even Macune came to advocate for what he called the subtreasury system, a unit he wanted to have created within the U.S. Department of the Treasury that would provide low-interest loans to farmers. These loans would be secured by cotton, wheat, and other staple crops. The subtreasury would protect its investment and support farmers through a federal system of warehouses and grain elevators in 1,000 counties across the country where the government would ensure minimum prices for crops and hold them until they sold at that price. If speculators could use the telegraph to make money buying and selling crop futures, why couldn’t farmers, with the right government support, use the same technical arrangements to ensure their own profits?
Although Alliance leaders took up the subtreasury idea and some politicians, like Tom Watson of Georgia, became advocates, the leadership of the Democratic Party resisted, as did virtually all Republicans. In the end, the subtreasury was never created. As a result, many within the Alliance began to question the value of staying out of politics.
520 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
More than public ownership of railroads or the subtreasury idea, the political issue	r
that engaged U.S. farmers was federal fiscal policy. When the government limited	j
the supply of currency, farmers had a very difficult time paying their debts, getting	j
loans, or getting the price they wanted for their crops. When the government made	i
more funds available, the resulting inflation made it easier to pay debts (because the	I
debt amounted to less in current dollars) and made it easier to sell the products of the	I
farms. Although easing the supply of money improved the situation of farmers, one
policy made it difficult to do: the nation s adherence to the gold standard, requiring	:
that every dollar in circulation be backed by a dollar’s worth of gold in a bank vault.
During the Civil War, the federal government had temporarily dropped the gold standard. Instead, it created federal bank notes, known as “greenbacks” because of their color, essentially printing dollars based not on gold but on the “full faith and credit” of the government’s promise to pay. Ihe government also allowed the additional use of silver as backing for currency during the war. Both of these policies eased the supply of money significantly, but they also fueled inflation since, with more dollars available, any dollar was worth less. Farmers liked inflation, but investors and bankers hated it. After the Civil War, the nation’s bankers demanded a return to the gold standard by gradually withdrawing greenbacks from circulation as the government paid down its Civil War debt and then in 1873 “demonetizing” silver so only gold, and not silver, could be used for coins or backing for dollars in circulation. These policies were effective in curbing inflation, but they led to an extremely tight money supply, tight credit, and challenging times for farmers. Ihe tight money of the 1880s was thus a direct result of federal policy, and the Farmers’ Alliance as well as the other farmer organizations were determined to change the policy. Some advocated expanding the number of greenbacks, others supported the coinage of more silver and some called for both, but all agreed that something needed to be done.
Populism Becomes a Political Party
18.2
i
Ihe rapid growth of the Farmers’ Alliance in the 1880s brought into the organization many state leaders who advocated direct political involvement. Leonidas L. Polk of North Carolina was the strongest of all these leaders. A Confederate hero, Polk made his fortune in real estate development when the Carolina Central Railroad crossed his old family plantation in 1873. He was active in the Methodist Church and in the Grange. He also helped ensure the end of Reconstruction in his state while helping recreate the Democratic Party there. Polk lobbied for the creation of a state Department of Agriculture, became its first commissioner in 1877, and in 1886, published his own newspaper, Progressive Farmer. In 1888, he brought the state organization he led into the Farmers’ Alliance, and within the year, 42,000 North Carolina farmers were members of the national organization.
Other states had similar leaders. South Carolina’s Benjamin R. Tillman had served in a militia that kept blacks and Republicans out of politics. He became active in the state Grange in the 1880s and became convinced that “the yoke of the credit system” was keeping farmers down. He convened a large meeting of white farmers in 1886, lobbied for a state agricultural college, and created a 20,000 member South Carolina Alliance that remained independent of the national organization. Georgia s Tom Watson was a lawyer and “friend and follower” of the Farmers Alliance, though as a nonfarmer he could not join. Nevertheless, he was elected to Congress as a Farmers Alliance candidate in 1890, expanding the movement of the Alliance into politics.
As the price of cotton fell to the lowest level in 30 years in 1891 and the farm economy continued to worsen throughout the 1890s—Watson, Tillman, Polk, and others rallied for a change. The nation’s largest labor unions, the Knights of Labor and the Women’s Christian Temperance Union, had recently launched a new political organization, the People’s Party, also known as the Populist Party, at a convention in Cincinnati in 1891 that was advocating for many of the reforms to currency
People's Party
Usually known as the Populist Party, a major third party of the 1890s formed to fight for the rights of working people.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change 5:
and regulation of railroads that the Alliance wanted. If the Farmers’ Alliance were to merge with the People’s Party, they could win elections and have their voices heard in state capitals, in Congress, perhaps even the White House.
Macune continued to oppose such political involvement, preferring farmer-controlled cooperative economic development. Polk became the leader of those who said yes to political involvement and specifically to joining the People s Party. Everyone knew that the 1892 convention of the Farmers’ Alliance would decide the issue. Polk won. Macune retired from the Alliance and spent the next 30 years practicing medicine and law while preaching in Methodist churches in rural Texas.
The People’s (or Populist) Party grew dramatically. The Colored Farmers’ Alliance and smaller groups like the Farmers’ Mutual Benefit Association also joined. The widespread assumption was that when the People’s Party, now a multiracial coalition of farmers, labor, and women’s groups, held their national convention in Omaha, Nebraska, in July 1892, they would nominate Leonidas Polk for president. A month before the convention, however, Polk suddenly died. The People’s Party nominated James B. Weaver of Iowa, a former Union general, and James G. Field, a former Confederate from Virginia, as his running mate. Polk’s charisma did not adhere to the new nominees. Nevertheless, Weaver won over a million votes in the 1892 presidential election that ultimately returned Cleveland to the White House. Not since the late 1850s, when the Republican Party had come out of nowhere, had the nation witnessed anything like the phenomenal growth of the Populists, as the members of the People’s Party quickly came to be known. Populist candidates won the governor’s office in Colorado and Kansas in the 1892 elections. Populists elected Marion Cannon to Congress from southern California as well as Congressmen from Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, and North Carolina. They elected eight representatives to the California state legislature, a group that held the balance between the Democrats and Republicans and almost succeeded in electing California’s U.S. Senator.
Two years later, Populist candidates won over 1.5 million votes, electing seven to the U.S. House, six to the U.S. Senate, and many to state legislatures. In a partnership with Republicans, Populists won control of the North Carolina legislature—the only time since Reconstruction when the Democrats had lost control of a state—and sent Marion Butler to the U.S. Senate. In 1894, Populist candidates won 41 percent of the vote for statewide offices in Colorado, 39 percent in Washington State, 39 percent in Kansas and 36 percent in Texas. Populists were elected to Congress from Alabama, Kansas, Nebraska, and North Carolina. The Populists, it seemed, were gaining power.
As the Populists approached the 1896 presidential elections, the Republican and Democratic Parties were keeping a worried eye on them and, at the same time, borrowing parts of their message. No one borrowed more from the Populists than the young former congressman from Nebraska, William Jennings Bryan. Bryan was a Democrat, not a Populist, but his views on many issues, most of all his advocacy for the unlimited coinage of silver, were the same as those of the Populists and anathema to leaders of the Democratic Party, including President Cleveland, who was not seeking reelection but who wanted a successor more like himself. Nevertheless, Bryan worked tirelessly for the Democratic nomination, courting as many “silver” delegates to the party’s 1896 convention in Chicago as possible.
When the Democrats finally met in early July, the debate on the platform was intense, pitting those who wanted to hold to the gold standard against the “free silver” Democrats who agreed with the Populists. Bryan spoke to the convention, electrifying the gathering as he concluded:
If they dare to come out in the open field and defend the gold standard as a good thing, we shall fight them to the uttermost, having behind us the producing masses of the nation and the world. Having behind us the commercial interests and the laboring interests and all the toiling masses, we shall answer their demands for a gold standard by saying to them, you shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
522
After the cheering stopped, the Democrats not only adopted a silver platform but also nominated Bryan for president. The Populists were torn about what to do since Bryan s views seemed so close to their own, and with him, they might actually win the White House. Although divided between those who wanted to maintain their independence and those who were willing to compromise, the Populist Convention that met in July nominated Bryan as their candidate for president. By joining forces with the Democrats, they were confident of victory.
The Republicans nominated William McKinley, a genial Congressman from Ohio, and the last Civil War veteran to run for president. In the fall campaign, managed by Marcus Alonzo Hanna, a wealthy supporter who was emerging as something close to a modern professional political advisor, the Republicans equated a vote for Bryan with a rebellion against the nation. They linked the Republican ticket with the flag, patriotism, and economic caution.
They called McKinley the “advance agent of prosperity” and some, like a young Theodore Roosevelt, described the Democrats and Populists as “plotting a social revolution and the subversion of the American Republic.” In the contest, the notions of patriotism, economic caution, and northeast regional distrust of the South and West won. A comfortable majority elected McKinley, though the results show how deeply divided the country had become (see Map 18-2).
The Populists never recovered from their loss in 1896. Those who had supported Bryan and the alliance with the Democratic Party blamed those who did not. Populists who had not wanted to compromise blamed those who had “sold out” and supported a Democrat. African-Americans whose votes had been essential to Populist victories in many close contests, were deeply disillusioned at how quickly Populist leaders like Tom Watson turned into arch segregationists after 1897.
The Populist Party continued for a short time, but the enthusiasm and confidence were destroyed by the divisions over the 1896 election. In 1900 and 1904, the party nominated Tom Watson who, having courted black voters in the 1890s, now campaigned on a platform of white supremacy even while he maintained the Populist economic program. The Democrats renominated Bryan in 1900, but he did poorly without Populist support and in the face of prosperity and McKinley’s considerable popularity. The new Socialist Party, emerging from Northern labor unions, began to contest presidential elections, taking many of the Populists labor union supporters. A moment and a movement had passed, although its efforts did, in the end, lead to the adoption of the silver standard. In the early 1900s, national interest turned elsewhere, although many elements of the Populist platform were adopted and became the basis for a later progressive movement championed by both Republicans and Democrats after 1900. The farmers of the South and West, who had organizing themselves so successfully and had bridged heretofore uncrossed gender barriers, were never able to resolve their racial divisions. Never again would they have the same level of political power.
Quick Review Was politics the best way for the farmers to address their grievances?
Why or why not? What might have been a more effective strategy?
ARIZ. NEW TERR. MEXICO TERR.
3
4
8
10
OKLA.
TERR.

13
17
Si
23
6 12 XV
INDIAN
TERR,
15

Electoral Vote by State
REPUBLICAN
William McKinley
DEMOCRATIC
William J. Bryan
271
176
MINOR PARTIES
447
24 15
1f
■ 12
12
11 / 9/
11 13 f
A V)
Popular Vote
7,104,779
6,502,925
265,155
13,872,859
I ‘Ip
MAP 18-2 The Election of 1896. This map of the electoral votes in the 1896 presidential election shows how deeply divided the country was. States where farming was dominant voted over-
\a/HpIminnl\/ fnr Rr\/an
WORKER PROTEST AND THE RISE OF ORGANIZED LABOR__________________________
Explain the tensions in industrial America that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914.
The Great Railroad Strike of 1877 began spontaneously in Baltimore, Maryland, and Martinsburg, West Virginia, on July 16 and 17, 1877, after the management of several railroads announced a wage cut. At Camden Junction, 2 miles from Baltimore, a fireman simply refused to keep the train moving. Soon others joined, and before long, all
rhanfor ift Rp<;nnnsps to Industrialism. Responses to Change
u.
traffic on the Baltimore 8c Ohio Railroad had come to a halt. The management then fired the strikers. In response, others joined the strike, and by July 19, rail workers prevented all freight from leaving Pittsburgh. Now mostly forgotten, the strike inspired some Americans, frightened others, and for decades shaped peoples responses to the country’s rapid growth and industrialization.
The strike was marked by widespread violence. A large crowd of strikers and their supporters in Baltimore attacked state militia troops who then fired on the crowd, killing 11 people. In Pittsburgh, a huge crowd hurled insults and rocks at a militia unit who then started shooting, killing 20. The crowd vented its fury on the Pennsylvania Railroad, burning everything in sight. By July 22, some 39 Pennsylvania Railroad buildings, 104 engines, and more than 1,200 freight cars had been destroyed. As news of the violence spread, strikes took place all along the major rail lines from New York and New Jersey to Indiana and Illinois. Black and white workers went out on strike together. In St. Louis, Missouri, a week-long general strike led workers to take control of the city. Workers went on strike as far away as Kansas City and San Francisco.
Women played a crucial role, and the Baltimore Sun reported about the “very active part taken by the women, who are the wives and mothers of the firemen. They look famished and wild, and declare for starvation rather than have their people work for the reduced wages.”
In response to a plea from the railroad management, President Hayes declared that a state of insurrection existed and called out federal troops who, armed with rapid-fire Gatling guns, put an end to the strike. Former President Grant criticized his successor, noting the irony that he himself had been criticized for sending the army to protect black voting rights but, “Now, however, there is no hesitation about exhausting the whole power of the government to suppress a strike on the slightest intimation that danger threatens.” But in the eyes of the new president, attacks on black voters and attacks on the property of the railroad companies were two different things.
Others drew their own lessons from the 1877 uprising. E. L. Godkin, editor of The Nation, called for doubling the size of the U.S. Army, but instead something new was created, the National Guard, made up of part-time soldiers who could be called out when needed. After 1877, states created National Guard units and built massive National Guard armories, stern stone buildings where arms might be stored in case of a new insurrection. These National Guard armories can still be seen in many cities—a monument to the 1877 rail strike.
Twisted track and the wheels of burned out rail cars show some of the $ 10 million damage caused by the 1877 railroad strike.
524 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914

The strikes also inspired the rise of labor unions that sought to help workers organize to demand new rights rather than just vent their fury. These unions sometimes led to additional uprisings, but in addition, they brought about changes in how corporations did business.
The Knights of Labor
Founded by tailors in Philadelphia in 1869, the Knights of Labor, Quickly emerged to become the country’s largest and most powerful labor union after the 1877 strike. The Knights welcomed white and black workers, immigrants as well as the native-born, and skilled and unskilled workers. Terence V. Powderly was the head, or Grand Master Workman, of the Knights of Labor in the 1870s and 1880s. Powderly believed that isolated workers and small local unions were doomed to defeat when facing railroads and other large corporations, and he wanted his union to have the same organizational power as the largest corporations.
Under Powderly’s leadership, the Knights tried to avoid violence. The Knights believed that workers and owners had more in common than their differences and hoped that eventually many workers could become independent owners rather than a permanent labor force. The union campaigned for government support of agricultural cooperatives, an 8-hour work day, equal pay for women, and government ownership of railroads and banks. Powderly took the commitment to racial integration seriously. At their October 1886 convention in Richmond, Virginia, Powderly caused quite a stir in the local community by inviting an African-American delegate, Francis Ferrell, to introduce him to the meeting. In 1883, they organized a successful strike against the Western Union Telegraph Company and, in 1885, were strong enough to win a strike against several railroads that agreed to restore lost wages and hire back all striking workers. For Powderly, the success of the 1885 strike showed what a strong union could do. By 1886, the Knights had 700,000 members. In an even larger railroad strike that began in Marshall, Texas, in 1886, some 9,000 workers stopped freight on lines in Texas, Missouri, Arkansas, and Kansas. Strikes, it seemed, were becoming a national phenomenon, and the Knights were in the forefront. However, while national leaders of the Knights urged peaceful negotiations, in the 1886 strike, strikers pushed rail cars off tracks and set fires to railroad buildings. To avoid further violence, the Knights called off the strike while claiming a victory that was not really theirs.
The railroad strike of 1886 showed the power of a union to bring the trains, and thus the country, to a halt. It also demonstrated the split between many members of the Knights who harbored deep hatred for industrial owners and union leadership that still sought conciliation. While the Knights remained strong and were an essential element in the Populist political campaigns of the 1890s, the split was never fully healed. In time, other unions, some more moderate, some more radical, would replace the Knights.
1ST
The Knights of Labor
Labor union that included skilled and unskilled workers irrespective of race or gender; founded in 1869.
; 132
American Federation of Labor (A.F. of L.)
Labor organization formed in 1886 as a federation of smaller elite craft unions.
The American Federation of Labor
While the Knights of Labor attempted to organize all workers, those in some of the more skilled trades created their own separate unions. In 1886, many of these small elite unions came together to create the American Federation of Labor with 50,000 members.
Samuel Gompers of the Cigar Makers Union was elected as its president and, except for 1 year, served as president of the A. F. of L. until his death in 1924, by which time it had grown to 3 million members, by far the strongest labor union in the United States.
Under Gompers’s leadership, the A.F. of L. continued to organize workers in separate craft unions with membership in each union restricted to workers in a specific trade such as cigar makers or plumbers or iron molders. Gompers carefully avoided larger issues, preferring to negotiate specifically for immediate ends increased wages, job security, an 8-hour day, benefits, and the right of the union to bargain collectively for workers. “We fight only for immediate objects.. .that can be realized in a few years,” Gompers said.
He was happy to leave political ideology and more far-reaching social change to others.
If the growth in the A. F. of L.’s membership is a measure, it was a successful strategy.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change 525
18.1!
I
IS J
j _____J
18.3
Haymarket
The name given to the strike, rally, and bombing that took place around Haymarket Square in Chicago in May 1886 as well as to the subsequent executions of four leaders of the incident.
Haymarket, 1886
On May 4, 1886, many of the tensions in the United States exploded at Chicago’s Haymarket Square. Between 40,000 and 60,000 of Chicago’s workers went on strike on Saturday, May 1, chanting their demands for an 8-hour work day, ‘eight hours for work, eight hours for rest, eight hours for what we will.” The A. F. of L. supported the strike. So did socialists and anarchists in Chicago’s diverse immigrant communities.
Socialism and anarchism, though quite different political philosophies, were both very strong in Chicago. Socialists believed that the workers should own the means of production and that private ownership of factories, businesses, and lands should be abolished in favor of ownership by all, which often meant government ownership. Anarchists deeply distrusted any government—including a Socialist government—and disdained elections as fraudulent exercises in futility. In place of government, anarchists wanted small, local, voluntary organizations. They believed that by abolishing higher authorities, a new era of peace and freedom would come. Nevertheless, for two anarchist leaders, Albert Parsons and August Spies, the 8-hour movement was an opportunity to bring skilled and unskilled workers together as a step toward their larger goal.
As the strike continued on Monday, May 3, Spies issued a call for a mass meeting to be held the following night at Haymarket Square and asked Albert Parsons to join him. Perhaps 3,000 people showed up at the Haymarket rally. But just as the rally was ending and Parsons himself was enjoying a beer at a nearby tavern, a police contingent marched into the rally to end it. Someone—no one ever found out who—threw a bomb into the middle of the police ranks, killing one police officer. Six more officers soon died of their wounds.
As news of the Haymarket bomb spread, newspapers blamed anarchists and socialists for the violence. Eventually, Albert Parsons, August Spies, and six others were tried and convicted for being part of “a general conspiracy to annihilate the police force and destroy property,” even though none of them could possibly have thrown the actual bomb. Appeals and a nationwide campaign for clemency ensued. Samuel Gompers, who certainly disagreed with anarchists, nevertheless said that Parsons, Spies, and the others had been “fighting for labor from different sides of the house.” In spite of all the appeals, four, including Parsons and Spies, were hung on November 11, 1887.
Haymarket—as the strike, rally, bombing, and executions all came to be called— was a pivotal moment in American labor history. For some, the trial and executions were a validation of the rule of law. For others, the trial and execution of men who never threw the bomb and did not have any known links to whoever did, provided proof that justice was not possible for those who protested in Gilded Age America. Lucy Parsons, Albert’s widow, spent the rest of her long life speaking and writing about their cause. Emma Goldman, a young girl at the time, traced her own career as a life-long radical organizer to the stories of the Haymarket martyrs.
Homestead Strike, 1892
While the 1886 strike for an 8 hour-day was a national event, other strikes followed, none more important than the 1892 Homestead Strike at Andrew Carnegie’s plant at Homestead, Pennsylvania. By the 1890s, Carnegie owned a dozen plants in western Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia. Workers at these huge mills turned out a quarter of the nation’s steel supply and earned $40 million per year in profits for Carnegie. Carnegie wanted to be seen as a friend to working people, but profits still came first. In 1892, when workers at Carnegie’s Homestead Steel Mill went on strike, Carnegie left his top lieutenant, Henry Clay Frick, in charge while he remained at his castle in Scotland. Frick decided that the time had come to break the 24,000-member Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel, and Tin Workers.
In June 1892, when it came time to negotiate a new contract, Frick offered only a cut in salary. When the union rejected the offer, Frick closed the plant, fired all of the workers, and built an 8-foot fence around it. He then hired new nonunion workers
526 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Coxey's Army
A protest march of unemployed workers, led by businessman Jacob Coxey, demanding a public works highway program and guaranteed jobs during the depression of the 1890s.
and 300 Pinkerton agents to protect them. The Pinkerton Agency had been created to support the North during the Civil War but turned into a quasi-police force for industrial owners who were caught in conflict with unions in the late 1800s. The Homestead workers fought back.
On July 6 when two barges of Pinkerton detectives came down the river to the plant, strikers who had been patrolling the area rushed the pier. No one knows who shot first, but both sides kept shooting. Eventually, between five and nine steelworkers and between three and ten Pinkerton agents were killed. Pennsylvania’s governor sent 8,000 militia troops to Homestead to keep the peace, and Frick brought in new workers who began operating the mill. Union leaders were arrested, but were acquitted (it was hard to find an antiunion jury in the region). Public opinion generally blamed Carnegie and Frick for the bloodshed. Nevertheless, Frick had won his battle. He had defeated the union and reopened the mills with nonunion workers. Unlike Andrew Carnegie, he did not care about public opinion. Carnegie also blamed Frick for the troubles, and the two never spoke again, but Carnegie also did not reinstate the union. Coxey's Army, 1893-94
In 1893, a grand worlds fair, the Columbian Exposition, opened in Chicago. Like earlier fairs, this one displayed the nations technological marvels and industrial success, including 400 buildings lit with 10,000 electric lights. While the fair was a booming success, the nations economy was collapsing in the Panic of 1893. J. P. Morgan rescued the country’s gold reserves (see Chapter 17) but did not end the terrible unemployment. By the end of the year, one-fifth of those who had been working before the panic were out of a job. Many were desperate, and the contrast between the desperation and the fair’s glitter was obvious.
An Ohio businessman, Jacob Coxey, was dazzled when he attended the Chicago fair, but deeply touched by the poverty and desperation he saw among unemployed in the city. Back in his hometown of Massillon, Ohio, near Akron, Coxey announced a plan to put the unemployed to work building roads. Coxey argued that America needed to improve its mostly dirt roads and also end unemployment. The solution was clear to him. Congress should appropriate $500 million in government bonds and offer every man who wanted to work $1.50 per day for an 8-hour day fixing the country’s highways. (Coxey assumed that the key was putting men, not necessarily women, to work.) And, Coxey insisted, if Congress did not act, the unemployed should march to Washington and demand action.
Although only about 100 marchers assembled at the beginning of the march, by the time the march got to Homestead, Pennsylvania, site of the Carnegie strike, it had grown to 600. All along the way, people gave them food and shelter. Coxey marched into Washington, DC, on schedule on May 1, 1894. The New York Times called the march a “Battle between Law and Anarchy.” Federal troops were put on alert. By mid-May, some 800 Coxeyites were in the District of Columbia, a number that grew to 1,200 in August. But Congress, dominated as it was by the corporate interests, did not pass Coxey’s legislation or do anything else to aid the unemployed. In August, police scattered Coxey5s Army, as they were called by the press. Coxey returned to Ohio where he lived to the age of 97 and died in 1951, still advocating federally financed highway improvement and pleased to see his goals partially fulfilled by the New Deal’s employment programs in the 1930s.
The American Railway Union, the Pullman Strike of 1894, and the Socialist Party
The American Railway Union was created in 1893 and led by Eugene V. Debs, who would go on to play an important role in American labor and political life for the next several decades. Debs was born in 1855 in Terre Haute, Indiana, and left school at 15 to take a job on the railroads. In 1875, he joined the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen but soon came to believe that having different unions for engineers, firemen, brakemen, and for the workers who maintained the tracks, was a recipe for defeat. His response was to help organize one union for everyone who worked on the railroads
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change
Coxey's Army with their supporters marched though towns from Ohio to Washington, DC, on their way to make their demands of Congress.
Almost immediately after its founding, the American Railway Union won a strike against the Great Northern Railroad in 1894. It looked like a new force was emerging. But then Debs found himself pulled into a strike he did not want, and the early successes of the American Railway Union turned to failure when the new union was involved in another strike at the Pullman Palace Car Company.
George Pullman did not operate a railway; he made railway cars—the very best railway cars anywhere in the United States. Pullman cars were elegant sleeping cars that cost four times as much as other railway cars and that allowed travelers who could afford the accommodations to cross the country in comfort. Having designed and manufactured the cars, Pullman leased the cars and their staff to various rail lines that attached them to regular trains. Both Pullman and the lines profited handsomely from the exchange.
To keep his employees out of industrial strife, Pullman built his own town, Pullman, Illinois, 12 miles outside of Chicago. In Pullman, 8,000 workers and their families lived in 1,400 houses that they rented from the company. They were provided with schools, an athletic club, free lectures, a local theater, and health care. The housing at Pullman was substantially better than housing available to most other industrial workers, but the rents were high and the rules strict. Pullman did not allow alcohol, and he had “spotters” who kept an eye on the behavior and home life of his employees.
Facing the Panic of 1893, Pullman thought that the only prudent thing was to lay off some workers and cut wages for the rest. He did not, however, reduce rents in Pullman since he also expected the town to pay its own way. Nevertheless, in spite of the depressed economy, the Pullman Company paid its standard dividends to its shareholders. In response, the workers went on strike. Ninety percent of the residents of Pullman did not show up for work. They called on Debs and the American Railway Union for support.
Debs told the Pullman workers that the midst of a depression was a terrible time to call a strike and urged them to postpone. They refused and Debs felt bound to support them. The American Railway Union refused to handle any train that had a Pullman car attached. By June, rail traffic through Chicago had stopped. The union took special
528 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
care to keep the mail trains running so there would be no reason for federal intervention, but the federal government intervened anyway.
The Cleveland administration obtained an injunction ordering the strikers back to work, and when they refused, Cleveland ordered 14,000 federal troops to Chicago to end the strike. When the army arrived in Chicago, there was a riot and 34 people were killed. Federal authorities not only ended the strike but also arrested Debs and disbanded the union.
Ihe strike and the jail term transformed Debs. He went to jail a charismatic labor leader. He came out convinced that the American economic system was permanently stacked against workers and their unions and that the only way to bring about change was political. He supported the Populist movement in the 1896 election but then founded the Socialist Party in the United States. The Socialists advocated government ownership of the nation’s major industries and a mandate for higher salaries for workers. In the national elections of 1904 through 1920—except 1916—Debs ran for president as the party’s candidate, winning hundreds of thousands of votes and giving himself a platform to advocate for a completely different economic system.
Miners and Their Unions
The steel that was transforming America required two key ingredients, iron ore and coal to fuel the smelting process that turned iron into steel. Coal also heated most of the nation’s cities, and coal-fired generators produced much of the nation’s electricity. These two ingredients had to be mined from deep in the earth, as did several other resources of great importance to the United States. Gold and silver were still the most valued forms of exchange. Lead pipes provided water to most houses. Bringing these resources to the industrial process required the backbreaking and dangerous work of miners. As the United States industrialized, the need for mines and miners grew exponentially However, since every dollar paid to a miner increased the cost of finished products, or reduced the profits of those who owned the manufacturing process, mine owners were determined to keep the pay of miners as low as possible; recruiting new immigrants who found themselves with few options.
18.1
18 J
18,3
of the Pullman Strike.
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change 52|
United Mine Workers of America
A new union organized in 1890 to bring together mine workers in the Eastern half of the United States in one organization that eventually became a national union.
Even before the Great Railway Strike of 1877, the country’s coal miners had been an angry lot. Coal had been mined in Pennsylvania’s Schuylkill Valley for generations, but in the 1860s and 1870s, miners had to dig deeper than ever, using pumps to lower the water table and machinery to ventilate the mines. Those deep mines were dangerous. The pumps could fail or a new stream could break through and drown miners. Tunnels could collapse. Methane or other dangerous gasses could collect and kill miners before they knew what was happening. And of course, the very properties that made coal valuable made fire an ever-present danger.
In the aftermath of the Panic of 1873, the mine owners cut pay, and in response, the miner’s union called a strike. By January 1875, Pennsylvania coal production stopped. Since cities were heated with coal, midwinter seemed like a good time to win a strike, but the mine owners had stockpiled coal and the cities stayed warm while miners starved. By July 1875, the strike was defeated and the miners went back to work, at the reduced wages.
The failure of the 1875 strike produced a secret organization among the Irish immigrant coal miners in Pennsylvania, the Molly Maguires, who attacked and sometimes murdered foremen, superintendents, and even a mine owner. The mine owners hired the Pinkerton Detective agency, which had played an important role in the Homestead Strike. A Pinkerton agent infiltrated the Mollys, and eventually 10 men were convicted of murder based on their involvement in the Molly Maguires and were executed in June 1877.
In the 1880s and 1890s, new efforts were made to create a new and stronger union among the coal miners of Pennsylvania, Ohio, Virginia, and West Virginia that was focused not on violence against owners but on victories for the workers. The United Mine Workers of America was founded in Columbus, Ohio, in 1890. The new union’s charter called for ensuring that the miners received a fair share of the wealth they created, “fully compatible with the dangers of our calling.” The United Mine Workers of America was open to all races and religions to avoid the divisions that had undermined earlier unions. During an 1894 coal strike in Alabama, the Chicago Tribune reported, “For the first time in this district, no distinction as to color was made. Negroes marched in companies sandwiched between the white men. A negro and a white miner carried a banner.” It was an all too rare moment in American labor history.
Under the leadership of a former Knights of Labor member, John Mitchell, who knew how to call a strike and when to call for arbitration, the United Mine Workers won a 10 percent raise in 1900 and then in 1903 won another raise along with recognition for the union and guarantees of fair weighing of the coal (since miners were paid by the weight of the coal they dug and often felt that they were cheated). By the early 1900s, the mine workers of the Eastern part of the country were better paid and living in better conditions than had been thought possible even a few years earlier, although it had been a hard road for them to get there.
Mining developed later in the West than in the East (see Chapter 16) but expanded rapidly. In 1883, gold was discovered in the Coeur d’Alene region of Idaho, the narrow northern part of the state. Before long, the gold was played out but deposits of silver, lead, and coal were found. The lead and coal, however, were buried much deeper than silver and gold, and Western miners found themselves working deep underground in dangerous conditions as employees of large corporations that were financed by Eastern stockholders. Several unions merged in 1891 to create the Miners’ Union of the Coeur d’Alenes. When the price for silver and lead fell on national markets in 1892, the Miners’ Union went on strike to protest a cut in wages from $3.50 a week to $3.00 a week, for a 7-day week of 10-hour days.
As in Pennsylvania, the mine owners hired the Pinkerton agency to infiltrate the union, and pitched battle broke out between unionized miners and nonunion workers. The governor of Idaho called for federal troops to end “a state of insurrection and rebellion.” In April 1899, striking miners used dynamite to blow up the Bunker Hill Mine in the Coeur d’Alene region after the mine superintendent fired all union workers. The governor of Idaho, Frank Steunenberg, who had been elected with union support in
530 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
1896, called for federal troops to restore order. When Steunenberg was assassinated in 1905, the Western Federation of Miners was blamed, but none of its leaders were convicted. The struggles in the West continued, and some of the union leaders, especially the charismatic William D. (Big Bill) Haywood, became national labor leaders.
The Industrial Workers of the World
On June 27, 1905, over 200 delegates gathered in Chicago to found a new union, the Industrial Workers of the World, known as the Wobblies. The IWW s founders wanted to create “one big union” of all workers no matter what their trade or skill. Western Federation of Miners leader Big Bill Haywood opened the convention saying, they were there to build, a working class movement that shall have for its purpose the emancipation of the working class.” Eugene V. Debs expressed the hope that the time had come to “begin the work of forming a great economic or revolutionary organization of the working class.” Mother Jones, Lucy Parsons, and other labor leaders joined in launching the IWW.
Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) | Popularly known as Wobblies, organized in I 1905 to bring together the nation's workers in "one big union" to fight for a radically different economic system that favored workers over owners.
American Voices
Mother Jones, “Victory at Arnot” 1897
Mother Jones became a union organizer and traveled the country supporting mine workers, other unions, and later the Socialist Party and the Industrial Workers of the World. She was arrested often but continued leading strikes with approaches such as described below from her autobiography, most likely an incident that took place during the United Mine Workers strike of 1897.
In Arnot, Pennsylvania, a strike had been going on 4 or
5 months. The men were becoming discouraged....Sunday afternoon I held a meeting...."You've got to take the pledge," I said. "Rise and pledge to stick to your brothers and the union till the strike's won!"
The men shuffled their feet but the women rose, their babies in their arms, and pledged themselves to see that no one went to work in the morning....
Then the company tried to bring in scabs [nonunion workers]. I told the men to stay home with the children for a change and let the women attend to the scabs. I organized an army of women housekeepers. On a given day they were to bring their mops and brooms and "the army" would charge the scabs up at the mines....I selected as leader an Irish woman who had a most picturesque appearance. She had slept late and her husband had told her to hurry up and get into the army. She had grabbed a red petticoat and slipped it over a thick cotton night gown. She wore a black stocking and a white one. She had tied a little fringed shawl over her wild red hair. Her face was red and her eyes were mad. I looked at her and felt that she could raise a rumpus.
I said, "You lead the army up to the Drip Mouth. Take that tin dishpan you have with you and your hammer, and when the scabs and the mules come up, begin to hammer and howl. Then al, of you hammer and howl and be ready to chase the scabs with your mops and brooms. Don't be afraid of anyone."
Up the mountain side, yelling and hollering, she led the women, and when the mules came up with the scabs and
the coal, she began beating on the dishpan and hollering and all the army joined in with her. The sheriff tapped her on the shoulder.
"My dear lady," said he, "remember the mules. Don't frighten them."
She took the old tin pan, and she hit him with it and she hollered, "To hell with you and the mules!"
From that day on the women kept continual watch of the mines to see that the company did not bring in scabs. Every day women with brooms or mops in one hand and babies in the other arm wrapped in little blankets, went to the mines and watched that no one went in. And all night long they kept watch. They were heroic women. In the long years to come the nation will pay them high tribute for they were fighting for the advancement of a great country....
The last of February the company put up a notice that all demands were conceded...before I left, the union held a victory meeting....The women came for miles in a raging snow storm for that meeting, little children trailing on their skirts, and babies under their shawls. Many of the miners had walked miles. It was one night of real joy and a great celebration.
Source: Mary Harris Jones, The Autobiography of Mother Jones (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1990), pp. 30-39.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What unique strategy did Mother Jones employ during the
1897 miners'strike?
2.	Comparison
Compare the strategy used by Mother Jones with that used by workers during the Homestead Strike. Do you think the different strategies help explain the differences in outcome that you note?
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change 53,
The IWW supported strikes all over the country, like this one by women from the Ladies Tailors union on the picket line during the "Uprising of the 20,000" garment workers strike.
The convention adopted a constitution that began, By organizing industrially we are forming the structure of the new society within the shell of the old. This mission was very different from the incremental goals of the American Federation of Labor. For the IWW, contract negotiations and strikes were only a step “within the shell of the old” to help launch the new world.
In the early 1900s, workers were not embarrassed to sing about their dreams and the IWW Song Book described them in songs, including one that mocked the idea that the poor should hope that, “You’ll get pie in the sky when you die” instead of taking action now. Another IWW song promised that, If the workers took a notion, they could bring the current economy to a halt.
The IWW was attacked by the press, the corporate world, and the government. It was also torn by ideological splits, personality tensions, and factional divisions. But for 15 years, the IWW was a major force in labor organizing around the country and included some of the country’s most charismatic labor leaders among its members.
The Garment Industry and the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire of 1911
The garment industry, one of the nation’s largest, employed mostly women. Between 1900 and 1910, New York City became the nation’s center in the manufacture of ready-to-wear clothing. Led by innovative owners, much of the work moved from the small sweatshops of the Lower East Side to larger factories in the new high-rise buildings of 10 and 12 stories in southern Manhattan. Max Blanck and Isaac Harris operated their factory, the Triangle Shirtwaist Company, in Greenwich Village. There, over 500 workers, most of them young Jewish and Italian women, assembled the popular shirtwaists (as women’s blouses were called) that were sold in department stores across the country.
In New York City alone, over 40,000 people worked in the garment trades in the early 1900s. Although divided by language—Yiddish, Italian, English and a host of other languages—the garment workers joined together to protest low salaries. The International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union (ILGWU) had a tough organizer, Clara Lemlich, who had emigrated from Russia in 1903 and who led women in a number of strikes. During some of the strikes, factories hired replacement nonunion workers while police arrested strikers or thugs beat them up. Women from New York’s social elite, including Anne Morgan, daughter of J. P. Morgan, sometimes joined the picket lines and they, too, were sometimes arrested or beaten.
In the late fall of 1909, as the ILGWU considered a general strike in the garment industry, many, including A. F. of L. president Samuel Gompers, urged caution. But Clara Lemlich said, “I have no further patience for talk... .1 move that we go on a general strike.” Workers cheered and the strike began. Factories all over Manhattan were picketed that fall. The garment industry owners organized their own association and refused to give in to the striker’s demands.
Striking garment workers got help from the national leadership of the A.F. of L., and from the Western Federation of Miners whose leader, Big Bill Haywood, sent word that “the Western miners are hearty admirers of your courage and fighting qualities.” They also got support from society women like Morgan and from African-American women who were being recruited as strikebreakers but who refused, though in a meeting they asked the union to “exercise a proper consideration of the claims and demands of the men and women of color who desire to enter the various trades.” The long strike ended in exhaustion for both sides in early 1911 when the union and the owners agreed to a compromise.
On Saturday March 25, 1911, only a month after the strike ended, a fire started under one of the cutting room tables
132 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Bread and Roses Strike
A spontaneous strike of workers in the mills of Lawrence, Massachusetts in 1912.
at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory. Perhaps a cigarette butt had been tossed in the bin of cotton scrap and dust, which exploded in a massive fire. Workers tried to put the fire out with buckets of water they kept on each floor, but it spread too rapidly. The fire started on the eighth floor and quickly filled the cutting room with smoke. Flames spread up airshafts to the ninth and tenth floors. Workers ran for exits, some of which had been blocked by the owners who, fearful of theft, insisted that all workers use only one exit.
New York’s firefighters arrived, but none had ladders that could reach to the eighth or higher floors. Some workers were quickly consumed by flames. More than 50 jumped from the windows, and 20 were killed when a flimsy fire escape on the outside of the building collapsed. In the end, 146 workers, most of them young women, were killed in the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire, the deadliest industrial catastrophe in
Manhattan for decades. Eventually, the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire led to new industrial regulations and important labor reforms. At the time, however, when devastated husbands, parents, friends, and relatives lined up at the makeshift morgue on Twenty-Sixth Street to try to identify the bodies, only the terrible loss seemed real.
Bread and Roses: The Lawrence Strike of 1912
A few months after the Triangle Fire, on New Year’s Day 1912, a new Massachusetts law limited the work week to 54 hours, a cut from the 56-hour norm in the mills of Lawrence. The management of the mill companies complied with the law and cut wages accordingly. They saw little reason to worry about any protest. The workers of Lawrence spoke 45 different languages and were divided into different crafts; less than one in ten was a union member. Cutting their pay seemed both prudent and low risk. But when the pay cuts appeared in the pay envelopes, workers immediately started to walk off the job. An estimated 14,000 workers were on strike by the end of the first day. In response to the strikers’ spontaneous action, the IWW, then at the height of its influence, sent some of its top organizers to Lawrence. They planned smaller meetings by language groups and large rallies on the Lawrence Common. To get around a city ordinance that banned gatherings in front of any of the mills, the strikers devised a new tactic—a moving picket line in which strikers did not stop but kept walking in a continuous line around the mill.
When IWW leaders were accused of putting women in the front lines, the IWW’s Elizabeth Gurley Flynn responded, “The IWW has been accused of putting the women in the front. The truth is, the IWW does not keep them in the back, and they go to the front.” At some point in the strike, when women, with their babies in their arms, marched through the streets of Lawrence with signs reading, “We Want Bread and Roses, Too” the strike was given a new name. The public generally supported the strikers, and the mill owners eventually agreed to an increase in salary and no discrimination against strikers. The Bread and Roses strike was a success; probably the greatest success in the IWW’s short history.
Ludlow, Colorado, 1914
In the mountains of southern Colorado, brutal working conditions persisted in the coal mines that were owned by John D. Rockefeller. On September 15, 1913, delegates from the mining camps gathered at Trinidad, Colorado, and voted for a strike demanding recognition for their union, a 10 percent increase in wages, an 8-hour day, the right to elect those who would weigh the coal, free choice of stores and doctors
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change 53
Violence during a coal strike in Ludlow, Colorado, in 1914 in which at least 30 people, including 11 children, were killed.
(rather than only company stores and doctors), and enforcement of Colorado mining laws. Mother Jones told the miners, “Don’t be afraid boys. . .Fear is the greatest curse we have.” Within a week, 80 to 90 percent of the miners were on strike.
Ihe strike lasted 14 months. It was long and bloody. The coal companies evicted the striking miners from their company-owned housing and the union arranged tent camps. Violence erupted between the coal company’s guards and strikers, and by the end of the first month, more than 20 people had been killed. Worse violence followed.
On April 20, 1914, militia troops recruited by the coal company took up positions around the miners’ camp at Ludlow, Colorado, and the nervous inhabitants then took up their own positions. No one knew who fired the first shot, but one shot quickly led to several hours of murderous fighting. Tents burst into flame, possibly from a bullet striking something explosive. Over 30 people were killed, including several women and 11 children found under one of the tents where they had huddled for safety. The Ludlow Massacre became a rallying cry for labor, and the loss of life, especially of children, permanently tarnished and troubled the Rockefeller family. President Woodrow Wilson sent U.S. army troops to restore order and the United Mine Workers Union declared that ending the strike was “doing the best thing possible for the men on strike who have suffered so long in order that justice might be done.” Further justice would take much longer.
183
Quick Review Was the violence that accompanied many strikes inevitable? Why or why not?
CONCLUSION
The rapid industrialization of the United States after the Civil War generated wealth and progress for some Americans and serious new problems for others. Very quickly, the disparities that emerged created new and violent tensions in the United States.
In the South, the end of Reconstruction set the region on a path that would continue to deny civil rights and economic opportunities to African-Americans for many decades to come. Combined with the country’s growing indifference to the original goals of Reconstruction, the New South successfully limited the advancement of African-Americans through legal exclusions. Even as the South was opening up to the world with the introduction of new railroad lines and the diversification of its economy, power and prosperity came only to some. Those who were excluded fought back, particularly African-Americans, who challenged segregation, violence, and their economic exclusion.
Farmers, white and black, also challenged their economic exclusion from the prosperity that Gilded Age America was generating. Through a number of organizations, especially the Farmers’ Alliance and later the Populist Party, farmers sought economic might equal to the giant corporations and political access at the highest levels.
Industrial workers also organized to fight for their rights. New Unions—the Knights of Labor, the American Federation of Labor, the United Mine Workers of America, and the Industrial Worker of the World—sought to protect worker’s rights. The nation was wracked by strikes, from the Railroad Strike of 1877 to the Miners Strike in Pueblo, Colorado, in 1914 as well as tragedies including the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire of 1912. Between the railway strike of 1877 and the Colorado strike of 1914, American workers fought to better their lives and working conditions. While some owners were sympathetic, the nation was divided by a great gulf between those who owned the industries and those who worked in them. Grand visions of a different kind of society were born but not achieved. More basic demands—for higher pay, safer conditions, shorter work days—were only partially met, and it would be another 2 decades, during the Great Depression and New Deal era, that industrial workers could get much of what they were asking for from 1877 onward.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did some of the disenfranchised (workers, blacks, farmers, etc.) attempt to make their voices heard in the late 1800s and early 1900s? Why were their tactics different? How successful were they?
534 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Chapter 18 Chapter Review
18.1
CONFLICT IN THE NEW SOUTH_________________________________
Analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of Reconstruction created the unique character of the New South.
Review Questions
1.	Historical Interpretation
What was new about the New South?
2.	Constructing an Argument
What factors contributed to the increased rigidity of racial segregation and renewed white efforts to exclude blacks from political life in the late 1800s?
3.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the response of Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. De Bois to racial segregation and discrimination. To what groups within the white community might each appeal? Why?
THE POLITICS OF CONFLICT—FROM POPULIST MOVEMENT TO POPULIST PARTY______________________________________
Analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on American politics.
Review Questions
4.	Historical Interpretation
What factors contributed to the rise of farmers’ organizations in the late 1800s?
182
5.	Crafting an Argument
How would you explain the emphasis that farmers’ political representatives placed on federal fiscal policy?
6.	Contextualization
What factors contributed to the nomination of William Jennings Bryan by both the People’s Party and the Democrats?
WORKER PROTEST AND THE RISE OF ORGANIZED LABOR
183
Explain the tensions in industrial America that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914.
Review Questions
7.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the Knights of Labor and the American Federation of Labor. How would you characterize the approach of each to the challenges facing American workers in the late 1800s and early 1900s?
8.	Historical Interpretation
What role did government play in the labor disputes of the late 1800s?
9.	Crafting an Argument
What group or groups bears greatest responsibility for the violence that often accompanied labor disputes in the late 1800s and early 1900s?
Chapter 18 Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the many ideas that were labeled progressive and the impact of those ideas on life in the United States.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
THE REVOLT OF THE INTELLECTUALS
Explain the role of muckraking journalists and intellectuals in shaping a progressive agenda.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE CITIES
Analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
RELIGIOUS RESPONSES TO THE GILDED AGE
Explain the main currents of religiously based reform movements during the progressive era.
PROGRESSIVE POLITICS ON THE NATIONAL STAGE_____________________________________________
Analyze the three "progressive presidents" and their administrations.
No one individual symbolized the Progressive movement as much as Theodore Roosevelt. As an advocate of the outdoor life, a "trustbuster," and a conservationist, he captured the hearts of many Americans in the early 1900s.
Theodore Roosevelt had been president for less than 4 months in December 1901 when he sent his first annual message to Congress. The new president said that, in light of the “tremendous and highly complex industrial development” in the country, the “old laws, and the old customs which.. .were once quite sufficient to regulate the accumulation and distribution of wealth.. .are no longer sufficient.” He asked Congress for new laws and new presidential authority to meet the new situation. Roosevelt was ready to act.
Roosevelt rejected the radicalism of Democrats like William Jennings
Bryan or Socialists like Eugene V. Debs. He insisted, “it cannot too often be pointed out that to strike with ignorant violence at the interest of one set of men almost inevitably endangers the interests of all.” He was full of praise for the corporate leaders who had created great wealth. Nevertheless, he asserted, “There is a wide-spread conviction in the minds of the American people that the great corporations known as trusts are in certain of their features and tendencies hurtful to the general welfare.” And since the “conditions are now wholly different,” therefore “wholly different action is called for.” As Roosevelt defined those “wholly different” actions in the weeks and months that followed, it became clear that he was charting a new course in American politics. He was no radical, but he was not a McKinley Republican either. He was determined to address the anger that fueled strikes—though
-Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
k536 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power-
certainly not to adopt the economic changes advocated by many strikers. In addition, he was committed to changing urban and industrial conditions and conserving the country’s natural resources.
As a result of his efforts, Roosevelt and the two presidents who followed him, William Howard Taft and Woodrow Wilson, came to be known as the progressive presidents. Presidential politics, however, were far from the only aspect of the larger Progressive movement that dominated American life between 1890 and 1917 and, indeed, led to the electoral success of Roosevelt and his successors. This chapter seeks to understand the many ideas that were labeled progressive and the impact of those ideas on life in the United States.
THE REVOLT OF THE INTELLECTUALS
19.1
Explain the role of muckraking journalists and intellectuals in shaping a progressive agenda.
Long before Theodore Roosevelt became president, numerous people in the United States were thinking about how best to respond to the extraordinary changes brought about by immigration, urbanization, and the rapid industrialization of the country. Upper-class reformers, newspaper reporters, ministers, writers, and college professors proposed new ways of ordering economic and political life. At the end of the 1800s, rapid industrialization and urbanization across the United States produced a radically different intellectual climate. New ideas, and those who envisioned them, began to shape the future of industrialized America.
Utopian Idealists
Henry George, a young journalist in California, was deeply troubled by the railway strike of 1877. Two years later, he published Progress and Poverty. The book quickly became a bestseller. George understood that there were benefits from industrialization, but the result, he said, was that “[f]rom all parts of the civilized world come complaints... of want and suffering and anxiety among the working classes.”
As a solution, George proposed a 100 percent tax on any increase in the value of land or any rents on land. He argued, “We already take some rent in taxation. We have only to make some change in our modes of taxation to take it all.” George said that his proposal would reduce the value and cost of land, thus allowing workers to turn to farming if they wished, which would create a labor shortage that would inevitably raise wages and improve conditions in factories. While many economists argued with George’s logic, the single tax movement became a political force, and single tax clubs sprang up everywhere. In 1886, New York’s Central Labor Union persuaded George to run for mayor of the city. Although George lost, his campaign led to a permanent reform coalition in New York.
Ten years after George’s book, Edward Bellamy, a journalist from Massachusetts, published Looking Backward in 1888. The book described a new perfect society in which class and class warfare had disappeared in a country of prosperous citizens who enjoyed their lives free of poverty or wealth and also free of lawyers and politics.
In contrast to Bellamy’s hopeful work, Ignatius Donnelly wrote Caesars Column in 1891, a book that described a country rigidly divided between a large working class living brutal lives and a small, comfortable elite. In Donnelly s fictional story, a few Americans are able to escape from their world and start a happy new community organized around the platforms of the Greenback Party, the Knights of Labor, and the Farmers’ Alliance.
George, Bellamy, and Donnelly and other authors like them were often unrealistic. Their images of a new perfect society seem romantic and their economic proposals unworkable. Nevertheless, in a county groping its way to a different economic order, all of them gave ideas, energy, and optimism to other reformers.
Significant Dates
1879	Progress and Poverty by Henry George
published
Frances E. Willard elected president of Woman's Christian Temperance Union
1881 Henry Demarest Lloyd publishes expose of Standard Oil Company
1889 Ellen Starr and Jane Addams open Hull House in Chicago
Hazen S. Pingree elected as reform mayor of Detroit, Michigan
1893 McClure's Magazine publishes first issue
1897 Samuel M. "Golden Rule" Jones elected reform mayor of Toledo, Ohio
1899	John Dewey's School and Society published
1901 Theodore Roosevelt becomes president at William McKinley's assassination
1904	Ida Tarbell's History of the Standard Oil
Company published
1906	Upton Sinclair's The Jungle published
1912	Woodrow Wilson defeats Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Eugene V. Debs for the presidency and launches New Freedom
1913	Federal Reserve System launched
1914	Clayton Anti-Trust Act
1917	Walter Rauschenbusch's A Theology for the
Social Gospel published
single tax movement
Proposed by Henry George in 1879, the single tax—a 100% tax on any increase in the value of real estate—was designed to keep property values low and therefore limit the accumulation of wealth while spreading opportunity more broadly in the society.
