CHAPTER 22
Living in Hard Times, 1929-1939
The Coming of the Great Depression
The New Deal
The Deep Roots of War—The U.S., Europe, and Asia
CHAPTER 2 3
Living in a World at War, 1939-1945
Preparedness and Isolation, 1939-1941
Mass Mobilization in a Society at War
Industrial Strength, Industrial Prosperity
A
World War—North Africa, Europe, Asia, the Pacific 1890-1919
20
Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
The British luxury liner Lusitania, shown here in New York harbor during its maiden voyage, was sunk by a German submarine with the loss of over 1,100 lives in May, 1915, an event that did much to galvanize American public opinion against Germany and bring the United States into World War I.
Demonstrate an understanding of the ways in which the United States engaged with the world and the impact of that engagement on the people of the United States.
CONTINUING EXPANSION_________________________
Explain continued U.S. expansion, particularly U.S. acquisition of what would much later be the 49th and 50th states.
20.2
THE SPLENDID LITTLE WAR.. .WITH SPAIN— CUBA, PUERTO RICO, AND THE PHILIPPINES,
1898 I
Analyze the causes and consequences of the U.S. War with I Spain in 1898. 20.3
FOREIGN POLICY, FOREIGN ADVENTURES,
1900-1914_______________________________ Explain developments in U.S. policy in Panama, Asia, and Mexico between the War with Spain and World War I.
0.4
THE UNITED STATES AND THE GREAT WAR
Analyze the causes and consequences of U.S. involvement in World War I.
566 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
In 1914, all of Europe went to war. President Woodrow Wilson was determined to stay out of the conflict and campaigned for reelection in 1916 with the slogan “He kept us out of war” Although Wilson would not continue to keep the nation out of the European war, the man he defeated in the 1912 presidential election, former President Theodore Roosevelt, was ready to go to war much sooner than Wilson. As president, Roosevelt liked to summarize his foreign policy with the proverb, “Speak softly and carry a big stick.” When Europe began what was then called the Great War, the former president was speaking less and less softly and arguing that the United States should prepare for war and that Wilson’s neutrality was a sign of personal and national weakness.
Roosevelt’s enthusiasm for a more activist approach to foreign policy was not out of character with his own presidency. When he became president in 1901, the United States had already acquired Alaska, Hawaii, and other islands in the Pacific. Many Americans wanted more land, or at least greater influence around the world. Other than his very active involvement in the acquisition of the Panama Canal Zone, Roosevelt had been surprisingly cautious in international relations. He reduced U.S. involvement in the Philippines, negotiated an end to war between Russia and Japan, brokered an agreement to soften Japan’s sense of insult at California’s anti-Japanese measures, and sought successfully to keep peace with the world. Many of Roosevelt’s strongest political supporters, progressive senators like Robert La Follette and reformers like Jane Addams, adamantly opposed U.S. endeavors abroad and U.S. involvement in World War I.
Nevertheless, although foreign policy is always shaped by many people and many forces, presidents Roosevelt and Wilson were certainly the dominant figures in U.S. international relations between 1898 and 1920. Their story, and the world they and so many others shaped, is the subject of this chapter.
CONTINUING EXPANSION
Significant Dates
20.1
Explain continued U.S. expansion, particularly U.S. acquisition of what would much later be the 49th and 50th states.
The geographical expansion of the United States that had continued from the time it declared independence persisted throughout the Progressive Era. Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan of the U.S. Navy persuasively laid the foundation for continued expansion in his book, The Influence of Sea Power upon History, published in 1890. Few books were ever as influential in the development of U.S. foreign policy. Mahan argued that all great nations in history had great navies that could control the world s oceans and, specifically, that the U.S. Navy needed to be large enough to be a significant player in the Pacific. He worried that the U.S. Navy was too small and that the lack of U.S. control of Pacific islands limited the nations reach. The popularity of his book accelerated developments already underway, and within a decade, the U.S. Navy had been expanded to the third largest in the world while the United States had annexed Hawaii and Puerto Rico in 1898 and had assumed control of Samoa, the Philippine Islands, and Cuba.
Not surprisingly, some have called the late 1800s the age of U.S. imperialism. Whether that term correctly describes U.S. expansion in this era continues to be debated. Certainly, thinking in the United States was influenced by the ways Britain, France, and Germany were seeking new colonies in Africa and the Middle East. Many Americans did not want their country to be left behind. Some people in the United States agreed with those Europeans who insisted that the white race was destined to rule the world’s people. Immigrants or the children of immigrants sometimes wanted the United States to intervene in their old homelands to protect the rights of compatriots. Even so, a surprisingly diverse array of Americans did not want their country involved in anything beyond its borders. Expansion beyond North America was never without controversy, even as the United States became involved around the globe.
U.S.
Navy Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan publishes The Influence of Sea Power upon History 1893 United States supports overthrow of
Hawaiian government, but new Cleveland administration blocks U.S. annexation of the islands
1898 Hawaii annexed by United States
U.S.
War with Spain leads to American control of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and Philippine Islands 1904 U.S. support for revolution in Panama followed by Panama Canal Treaty
1907-08 Gentlemen's Agreement with Japan limiting Japanese immigration to United States
1912 Alaska granted territorial status
1914-1917 U.S. intervention in Mexico
1914	World War I begins in Europe
1915	British liner Lusitania is sunk with loss of American lives
1917	United States enters World War I on side of Britain and France
1918	World War I ends
1919	Treaty of Versailles negotiated including League of Nations, then rejected by U.S. Senate
U.S. imperialism
A term used to describe the U.S acquisition of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Philippine Islands in 1898.
Alaska
Long before Mahan argued for greater U.S. control of the oceans, the United States
assumed ownership of the huge Russian territory known as Russian America, or
Alaska. In the 1740s, Vitus Bering, a Danish captain serving the Russian Navy explored
the Arctic Oceans between Asia and North America. Soon thereafter, Russia had joined
Britain, France, and Spain in claiming large parts of North America. A Russian gover-
nor moved to Sitka, Alaska, in 1799 to administer Russian communities that dotted the
coast of what is today Alaska, Canada, Washington, Oregon, and northern California.
Control and management of the vast Russian territory was vested in the private Russian
American Company. Russians fished and traded in sea otter skins, providing support
for the colony and modest returns to Russia itself.
The value of Alaska to the Russian company or government was never great.
Tensions with native residents ran deep. Russians exploited Native Alaskans while
Western diseases took a heavy toll of the native population. In response, Native
Alaskans massacred Russian communities at Sitka and Nulato. By 1860, the govern-
ment was unhappy with the Russian American Company and worried about defending
the long Alaskan coast from the British Navy.
American settlers in Washington Territory were learning about the rich fishing,
whaling, and fur trapping that was possible in Alaska. Secretary of State Seward envi-
sioned its value and coordinated negotiations to purchase it from Russia. The negotia
tors agreed on a price of $7.2 million, and on October 18, 1867, the Russian flag was
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 5<
20.1
20.2
hauled down at Sitka and the Stars and Stripes rose in its place. Congress balked at appropriating the funds for the purchase, and critics called the whole transfer Seward s folly,” but the nation had gained valuable new territory. Fishing, mining, the fur trade, and indeed the sale of ice to Californians made Alaska a good investment. However, Aleuts, Sitkas, Kolosh, and other Alaskan tribes found that they had only substituted one overlord for another. U.S. troops, miners, and settlers fought with Alaskan tribes as they had with native peoples further south.
Having purchased Alaska, the U.S. government was slow to do much with it. Only in 1884 did Congress create any official form of government for what they called the District of Alaska. Soon thereafter, gold was discovered in the district, and the Klondike gold rush of the late 1880s expanded the American population of Alaska as did 1898 legislation that extended the provisions of the 1862 Homestead Act to Alaska. Finally in 1912, President Taft signed legislation giving Alaska full territorial status, and the elected legislature first met at Juneau the following year.
Hawaii
Hawaii's Queen Liliuokalani was overthrown in an uprising led by American planters. A century later, the U.S. government apologized to native Hawaiians for this illegal act.
Although the United States was a major influence in Hawaii long before Mahan argued for a wider Pacific influence for the nation, it was in Mahans time that the United States annexed Hawaii. While the American Revolution was being fought, a British explorer, fames Cook, landed on a chain of islands that he named the Sandwich Islands, which came to be known as Hawaii. Before Cooks arrival in 1778, there had been no contact between the native Hawaiians and Europeans. The Polynesian people whom Cook encountered were governed by a stable if loosely held feudal monarchy. Unfortunately, like other native peoples, they had no immunity to Western diseases, and the contact initiated by Cook took a terrible toll.
Hawaii’s strategic location halfway between California and Japan and its harbors that were perfect for American whaling vessels greatly interested American and European merchants and U.S. Navy officers. By the early 1800s, Hawaiian harbors were filled with U.S. Navy ships and private whaling vessels, and Americans mixed with Hawaiians on a regular basis. In 1820, a group of New England missionaries and three American-educated Hawaiians arrived to convert Hawaiians to Christianity and interest them in American culture.
U.S. control of California with its large Pacific harbors in 1848 and the completion of the Transcontinental Railroad in 1869 expanded U.S. commercial and military interest in the kingdom of Hawaii. Trans-Pacific steamship lines that began at the Pacific docks where the railroad ended sought fueling stations on their way to Asia, and Hawaii’s Pearl Harbor was the perfect stopping place. At the same time, American-owned sugar plantations had become a major economic force in Hawaii. Native Hawaiians, who were now a minority within their own country and controlled perhaps 15 percent of the land and 2 percent of the capital, did not want to further U.S. influence in their country, but the Hawaiian government agreed that it would not grant special trading rights or naval bases to any other country in return for a promise that Hawaii could ship a steady supply of sugar duty-free to the United States. Hawaii’s King Kalakaua visited the United States in 1874 to formalize the agreement.
By the 1880s, American economic power in Hawaii was overwhelming, but the islands remained independent. When King Kalakaua died, his sister Queen Liliuokalani succeeded him. She sought to regain “Hawaii for the Hawaiians” and reduce the economic and political power of the United States. Most of the American planters on the island did not like the queen’s moves and formed the Annexation Club. In 1893, the annexation group overthrew her and seized power. Ihe U.S. minister in Hawaii, John L. Stevens, cabled Washington, “The Hawaiian pear is now fully ripe and this is the golden hour for the United States to pluck it.” The U.S. Navy landed sailors “to preserve order,” thus securing the queen’s overthrow. Hawaii would have been annexed to the United States if the recently inaugurated Democratic President Grover Cleveland had not sensed that there was something unseemly about the whole affair and ended negotiations with the rebels. Cleveland announced his firm opposition to annexation.
□k
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
120°
140°
0	10C
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 5j



■ wb
NETHERLANDS EAST INDIES

MAP 20-1 The U.S. in the World, 1900. By 1900, the United States had claimed many islands in the South Pacific and had strong involvement with other Pacific islands as well as Latin American countries.
Under Cleveland, the United States might have supported Liliuokalani’s restoration had she not insisted that she would execute all of the rebels. That action was too much for Cleveland, and his administration ignored Hawaii, which continued as an independent nation under the control of the American planters who had overthrown the queen’s government.
When William McKinley was elected president in 1896, he demonstrated none of Cleveland’s resistance to U.S. acquisition of Hawaii as the next step in the nation’s “Manifest Destiny.” McKinley said, “We need Hawaii as much.. .as in its day we needed California.” In June 1897, McKinley proposed a treaty of annexation, to which the planter government agreed. McKinley realized that anti-imperialists in the Senate could block the two-thirds vote required to approve the treaty, so the president used the same strategy that John Tyler had used half a century earlier for Texas. He asked both houses of Congress to annex the territory by joint-resolution, which required only a majority vote. By June 1898, to the protests of native Hawaiians and the cheers of the planters, Hawaii became a permanent territory of the United States. In that same year, the United States annexed tiny Midway and Wake islands and, a year later, agreed to divide Samoa with Germany. Across the Pacific, Mahan’s dream of stations for the growing navy was a reality (see Map 20-1).
opments in the United States, contribute to the nation's interest in acquiring Alaska and Hawaii as new territories?
THE SPLENDID LITTLE WAR.. .WITH SPAIN—CUBA, PUERTO RICO, AND THE PHILIPPINES,
1898 _____________________________ Analyze the causes and consequences of the U.S. War with Spain in 1898.
20.2
Ihe U.S. War with Spain in 1898 (often called the Spanish-American War) followed decades of U.S. expansionism—much of it expansion into territory that had previously been part of Spains once-vast empire in the Americas. Spain had at one time exercised political control of all of Latin America, except for Brazil, and it had ruled the Philippine Islands for centuries. As a result of successful independence movements, all that was left of the Spanish empire in the 1890s was the Philippines and a collection of Caribbean islands. Many in Spain wanted to retain those outposts for their own value and as symbols of Spains past glory. Nevertheless, as a result of a short war—which future Secretary of State John Hay called “a splendid little war”—Spain lost the last of its holdings. Ihe United States gained long-term influence in both Cuba and the Philippine Islands, and made Puerto Rico a permanent U.S. territory.
Tensions in Cuba
Ihe U.S. War with Spain started in Cuba. Ihe United States had long been interested in Cuba. Well before the Civil War, southern Senators had suggested that the United States ought to acquire Cuba as a slave state to offset the growing number of Northern free states. In 1854, the American ambassadors to Europe’s leading powers issued the so-called Ostend Manifesto, demanding that Spain sell Cuba to the United States, but it did not happen. After the Civil War, Cuba was no longer of value as a slave state, but interest in the island never disappeared from American politics, and American investors were active there. By the 1890s, almost 90 percent of Cuban exports came to the United States, and American investors owned much of the best farm land on the island.
Cubans wanted to throw off Spanish rule and win independence. An 1890 agreement with Spain had reduced the tariff on sugar, launching a boom in the Cuban economy, but a new U.S. tariff in 1894, strongly influenced by lobbying from the Sugar Trust in the United States, significantly raised the tariff on imported sugar. Ihe increased cost of Cuban sugar in the United States, significantly reduced the sales of Cuban sugar and devastated the Cuban economy. Cuban revolutionaries led by Jose Marti, who had been living in exile in New York City, saw the resulting Cuban depression as the ideal moment to gain independence. Marti returned to Cuba in 1895, and his revolutionary forces began burning cane fields, killing Spanish soldiers, and making Spanish rule more costly. Spanish authorities responded by creating concentration camps where they held Cubans in controlled enclaves that separated them from the rebels. Many in these camps suffered from malnutrition and disease.
When William McKinley was inaugurated as U.S. president in 1897, he made it clear that he wanted Spain out of Cuba. American public opinion was on the side of the rebels. New York newspaper editors William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer engaged in what was called “yellow journalism” (named for a popular cartoon character of the day known as the “Yellow Kid”), publishing sensationalized accounts of Spanish atrocities in Cuba. They sent well-known artists like Frederic Remington, and writers like Richard Harding Davis, to Cuba to report on Spanish actions to increase circulation for their publications.
While many Americans saw the Cuban revolution of the 1890s as a simple question of good Cubans against bad Spaniards, American business leaders with investments in Cuba also worried that a revolutionary victory would threaten their investments. Marti, while grateful for American support, worried about long-term American influence, insisting that, “To change masters is not to be free.”
170 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
The Spanish government in Madrid did not want a war with the United States, and they worried—correctly, it would turn out—that the government, and indeed the Spanish monarchy, could not survive the overthrow of the last bastion of Spain’s empire in the Americas. As U.S. public opinion became more belligerent, so did public opinion in Spain.
Spanish people rallied to their flag, and in one town a mob attacked the U.S. consulate.
War in Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippine Islands
In February 1898, over 200 American sailors were killed when the battleship USS Maine
blew up in Havana Harbor. The explosion may well have been the result of a bad boiler;
however, Americans blamed Spain, and ‘Remember the Maine” became a rallying cry.
McKinley managed to get Congress to declare war without ever asking for it.
The U.S. invasion of Cuba was not well managed. American troops arrived wearing wool uniforms—hardly the right material for a hot Caribbean summer. Even though Theodore Roosevelt gained fame for leading mostly African-American troops (shown as white in subsequent pictures) in a rapid assault on San Juan Hill, the battles in Cuba were generally slow and difficult. In 4 months of fighting, 345 Americans were killed in action while 5,000 died from disease.
Since the United States was at war with Spain, McKinley also approved the orders that had been issued by Assistant Secretary of the Navy Roosevelt (issued just before he resigned that position to fight in Cuba) to Admiral George Dewey to sail the U.S. fleet to the Spanish-owned Philippine Islands. The six warships under Dewey’s command quickly sank the Spanish fleet at the Battle of Manila Bay on May 1, 1898, giving the United States control of a Pacific territory much larger than Cuba. The American Pacific fleet also captured the Spanish garrison on Guam Island and took control of the uninhabited atoll of Wake Island.
Finally, the United States decided to take the last Spanish outpost in the Caribbean,
Puerto Rico. Once control of Cuba seemed assured in July 1898, McKinley ordered General Nelson A. Miles to Puerto Rico. He wanted to be sure the troops arrived before peace talks began with Spain. In 1898, some Puerto Ricans welcomed the U.S. overthrow of Spanish authority, and the indigenous independence movement in Puerto Rico was not as strong as that in Cuba.
By August 1898, Spain was ready to ask for peace. Much to McKinley’s displeasure, the congressional resolution authorizing the war had included the Teller Amendment, named for Senator Henry Teller of Colorado, which said the United States could not permanently annex Cuba. If the United States could not annex Cuba,
Puerto Rico seemed like the next best permanent U.S. territory in the Caribbean. In the case of the Philippines, which had not been an initial focus of the war, McKinley felt that he could “see but one plain path of duty—the acceptance of the archipelago.” In the Treaty of Paris of December 1898, Spain ceded control of Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines to the United States for a payment of $20 million. Afterward, the United States promised eventual independence for Cuba. Suddenly, the United States was a world power, joining the nations of Europe with its own far-flung empire. What to do with that empire would be a subject of considerable debate in the future.
The Anti-Imperialists
When the U.S. War with Spain ended, the United States had to decide what to do with
its new territory. In spite of the Teller Amendment, President McKinley did everything
possible to maximize U.S. involvement in Cuba, including ensuring that the U.S. Navy
would have a perpetual base at Guantanamo Bay. The United States was going to keep
Puerto Rico, but what about the distant Philippines? The war had begun and ended in the
Caribbean over issues of Spanish control of Cuba; however, as part of the war, the United
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 57l
A large number of the troops who fought in Cuba, including those commanded by Theodore Roosevelt in his assault on San Juan Hill, were African-American soldiers like these from the 9th Cavalry.
After liberating the Philippine Islands from Spain, the United States quickly found itself at war with the Filipino people who wanted independence and, as this picture shows, took many of the people of the island prisoner.
?« 4 j
States also found itself in control of a chain of seven thousand islands with 7 million people living thousands of miles from the United States.
President McKinley told a group of visiting Episcopal clergy that he had lost sleep and had prayed long and hard about what to do with the islands and that the answer had come to him: “[T]here was nothing left for us to do but to take them all, and to educate the Filipinos, and uplift and civilize and Christianize them.” The United States could not give them back to Spain or another country and, he insisted, “they were unfit for self-government.”
Nearly all Filipinos were already Christian since Catholic Spain had ruled the islands for nearly 400 years, but McKinley meant Protestant Christianity. The Constitution might prohibit the government’s direct involvement with the religious beliefs of the Filipinos, but allowing missionaries was easy.
A greater difficulty with the president’s plan was the fact that many Filipinos did not want to be annexed by the United States. A revolt against Spain had been underway long before Commodore Dewey sank the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay. In addition, Dewey had encouraged Emilio Aguinaldo, leader of the Filipino insurrection, to establish an interim government for the islands. Aguinaldo expected U.S. recognition of Philippine independence, and even after it became clear that this was not President McKinley s plan, Aguinaldo hoped for either the defeat of McKinley’s treaty in the Senate or a victory in the 1900 presidential elections by William Jennings Bryan, who strongly opposed annexation of the Philippines. When the Senate ratified the treaty with Spain and Bryan lost the election, Aguinaldo led a revolt against the United States. What the U.S. government called the “Philippine Insurrection,” Aguinaldo called a war for independence.
Between 1898 and 1902, and beyond, the U.S. Army engaged in a brutal battle with Filipino insurgents. Many more American soldiers were killed in the postwar insurgency in the Philippine Islands than were killed in the war with Spain. Thousands of Filipinos were killed—perhaps 20,000 in combat and 200,000 from war-related causes—and many more left homeless.
572 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Within the United States, broad-based opposition to the war in the Philippines was organized as the Anti-Imperialist League, founded at Boston in June 1898. The league included unlikely allies. Andrew Carnegie offered to buy the islands from the United States to secure their independence and wrote to one member of McKinley’s cabinet, You seem to have finished your work of civilizing the Filipinos; it is thought that about 8,000 of them have been completely civilized and sent to Heaven; I hope you like it. Charles Francis Adams (descendent of two presidents), former abolitionist Thomas Wentworth Higginson, reformers including Jane Addams and Henry Demarest Lloyd, labor leaders including Samuel Gompers, rival Democrats William Jennings Bryan and Grover Cleveland, and university presidents like Harvard’s Charles W. Eliot and Stanford’s David Starr Jordan all opposed the annexation.
The nation s best-known authors, Mark Twain and William Dean Howells, turned biting humor on McKinley’s efforts. Twain said that the U.S. efforts in the Philippines meant that the United States had become “yet another Civilized Power, with its banner of the Prince of Peace in one hand and its loot-basket and its butcher-knife in the other.” Booker T. Washington said, “Until our nation has settled the Indian and the Negro problems, I do not think we have a right to assume more social problems.”
Most anti-imperialists insisted that the Constitution did not allow for the United States to acquire any territories that it did not plan to eventually admit as states and that “the Constitution follows the flag”—meaning all of the civil and political rights guaranteed in the Constitution also applied to other people under U.S. control. The advocates of territorial expansion did not agree, and in May 1901, the U.S. Supreme Court in a series of 5-4 decisions in the Insular Cases declared that the Philippines and Puerto Rico were territories, not future states, and that therefore those residing there were “subjects” not “citizens.” It was a bitter moment for the anti-imperialists.
While Roosevelt had been one of the staunchest advocates of going to war in 1898 and of keeping control of the Philippine Islands after the war, by the time he became president in 1901, the U.S. effort was increasingly unpopular and he had other priorities. In 1901, the Army captured Aguinaldo. William Howard Taft, who had been governor general of the Philippines, was welcomed home, and a truce settled on the islands, though U.S. troops remained until the Japanese invasion at the start of World War II. United States’ attention turned elsewhere.
"the Constitution follows the flag"
An argument that the rights of U.S. citizens should be extended to any people living in a territory conquered by the United States.
Quick Review Was the U.S. War with Spain a triumph for the United States?
20.3
FOREIGN POLICY, FOREIGN ADVENTURES,
1900-1914_______________________ Explain developments in U.S. policy in Panama, Asia, and Mexico between the U.S. War with Spain and World War I.
When Theodore Roosevelt became president in September 1901, he inherited two major foreign policy issues from McKinley—the ongoing war in the Philippines, which he quickly put behind him, and the question of a Central American canal connecting the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, which he embraced with Rooseveltian enthusiasm. Roosevelt considered the Central American canal one of his proudest achievements.
A
Canal in Panama Ever since the California Gold Rush of 1848, there had been talk of building a canal across Central America that would allow shorter travel by ship from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans, but the hurdles were significant. The narrow point of land between North and South America was hot and damp, and mosquito-born diseases made working there a death sentence. The land was also mountainous, and for any canal to be built, engineers had to design a series of locks to raise and lower ships. Nevertheless,
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era S

204
Mostly West Indian workers, using steam shovels and hand tools in backbreaking labor, built the Panama Canal once the United States gained control of the territory.
Roosevelt Corollary
President Theodore Roosevelt's policy asserting U.S. authority to intervene in the affairs of Latin American nations; an expansion of the Monroe Doctrine.
in 1850, the United States and Britain negotiated the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty, stating that any canal would be a joint venture though neither controlled the territory. Fifty years later, few in the United States still wanted a joint venture with Britain, and in November 1901, Secretary of State John Hay and the British Ambassador to the United States, Lord Pauncefote, concluded a treaty that gave the United States the exclusive right to build an interocean waterway in Central America. McKinley had created an Isthmian Canal Commission that recommended building a canal in Nicaragua, but Roosevelt preferred a shorter route through Panama.
The canal was not the first time Roosevelt involved the United States in Latin America. In 1902, shortly after he came to office, the government of Venezuela held back on debt payments to European banks. Britain, Italy, and Germany sent ships to Venezuela, but Roosevelt, citing the Monroe Doctrine, pressured them to withdraw. A year later when the Dominican Republic seemed set to follow the same route as Venezuela, Roosevelt sent U.S. forces to the island and took control of its customs operation, dividing the revenue between the country and the European creditors, an involvement in the finances of the Dominican Republic that lasted until 1941. Then, in 1904, he formalized U.S. action in the Dominican Republic, announcing the “Roosevelt Corollary” to the Monroe Doctrine, stating that the United States had a right to intervene in any nation in the Americas that could not manage its own affairs.
Roosevelt’s greatest interest in Latin America, however, remained constant. He wanted a canal, and he wanted it built in the territory of Panama that then belonged to Colombia. Even though the government of Colombia did not agree, many in Panama saw the situation differently. Panama was a frontier province of Colombia, distant enough that it could take 15 days for messages from Panama City to reach the national government in Bogota. Many in Panama were ready to declare independence. There is no evidence that Roosevelt actively urged a revolution, but he certainly did nothing to discourage one either. In November 1903, when Panama revolted against Colombian rule, Roosevelt sent orders to U.S. Navy ships standing by on both the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of Panama to “prevent landing of any armed force with hostile intent, either government or insurgent.” Since the insurgents were already in Panama and the only forces that wanted to land were from the Colombian government, the impact of the order was clear. Describing the independence movement in Panama, Roosevelt told the U.S. Congress that the people of Panama had risen up against Colombia, “literally as one man.” Senator Edward Carmack retorted, “Yes, and the one man was Roosevelt.”
Once Panama declared independence, the United States quickly—with “indecent haste,” one critic said—recognized the independent Panamanian government and then 1890-1945
74 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression,
proposed the canal to them. Three months later, in February 1904, both nations ratified a treaty giving the United States the right to a canal zone 10 miles wide, which “the United States would possess... [as] if it were the sovereign of the territory”, while the new government in Panama City got the $10 million that had originally been offered to Colombia. Roosevelt got the route he wanted, if not the good will of Latin America.
Late in his term, Roosevelt visited Panama. Ever the energetic enthusiast, he climbed up to the driver’s seat of the biggest steam shovel digging the canal, spoke with some of the 19,000 West Indian laborers who were doing the backbreaking work (and who died at an astounding rate—85 just in the month of the president’s visit), met with authorities of the new government, and envisioned ships passing through the canal and towns rising on the banks of what was still, at that point, a muck-filled ditch. The canal did not open until 1914, long after Roosevelt had left office. With or without Roosevelt, the United States would most likely have built a canal between the oceans at some point. Nevertheless, the route and the speed were a result of Roosevelt’s efforts.
The United States, Russia, Japan, and China
Across the world, Russia had long been expanding its territory. Russian Cossacks had
asserted control of Asian Siberia for Russia in the 1600s and then looked west to North
America and south in Asia. All Russian expansion came to an abrupt halt in early
1904, however. Japan, which had emerged as a modern military and diplomatic power,
was determined to stop Russia from acquiring influence in Manchuria and Korea. The
Japanese fleet under Admiral Heihachiro Togo attacked and destroyed a Russian fleet
anchored at Port Arthur. To America, the war seemed far away, and the United States
quickly declared neutrality. A year later, in May 1905, another Russian fleet was destroyed.
The Japanese Navy sank twenty-two Russian ships, killed some 4,000 Russian sailors, and
captured several more ships along with the Russian commander Admiral Rozhdestvenski.
Nevertheless, no peace treaty emerged, and Japanese resources were spent.
The Japanese government sent a secret message to Roosevelt, asking if he would “directly and entirely of his own motion and initiative. ..invite the two belligerents to come together.” Roosevelt loved the idea of playing mediator and proposed arbitration to the tsar. Russia agreed, and the announcement of the peace conference won Roosevelt worldwide praise.
Once Roosevelt got representatives of both countries to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, in August 1905, they argued about borders, money, and a postwar plan.
But eventually, Roosevelt’s arm-twisting led to a peace agreement. The war ended, and Roosevelt was praised by the Russian tsar and the Japanese emperor. A year later,
Roosevelt was rewarded with the Nobel Peace Prize.
While the czarist government was grateful for Roosevelt’s role in ending the war,
Russian immigrants to the United States had their own grievances against the tsar’s rule. When hundreds of Russian Jews were killed in pogroms between 1903 and 1906,
Jewish immigrants in the United States pressured the U.S. government to do something about the situation, and President Roosevelt and Secretary of State John Hay issued a formal protest. The Russian ambassador responded to the protest saying that it was “unbecoming for Americans to criticize” Russia in light of American lynching of African-Americans and the bad treatment of Chinese immigrants.
Japan, too, though appreciative of Roosevelt’s efforts to mediate with Russia, was not pleased by San Francisco’s segregation of Japanese students. California was the port of entry for immigrants from Japan and China. It was also the place where anti-Asian feelings ran strongest. In October 1906, in the aftermath of the city’s great earthquake, as they reorganized and reopened the city’s schools, the San Francisco School Board adopted a policy of racial segregation for Chinese, Korean, and Japanese children. The government of China protested but was too weak to do more. In Japan, however, anger at the insult led to calls for war. Roosevelt tried to convince Californians to rescind the segregation order while encouraging the government of Japan to ignore the insult, but failed at doing both.
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 57^
~ Gentlemen's Agreement
. A diplomatic agreement in 1907 between
Japan and the United States curtailing, but not abolishing, Japanese immigration.
203
Great White Fleet
A U.S.
Navy fleet sent around the world from December 1907 to February 1909 by President Theodore Roosevelt to show American strength and to promote good will. dollar diplomacy
The U.S. policy urged by President Taft of using private investment in other nations to promote American diplomatic goals and business interests.
However, in 1907 and 1908, he successfully negotiated the Gentlemen’s Agreement by which the United States agreed not to pass any formal limit on Japanese immigration and the Japanese government agreed to limit the emigration of laborers to the United States. For Japan, it was important not to face anything as insulting as the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 had been. For Californians, Roosevelt had accomplished the goal of establishing a limit on Japanese immigration. At the same time, Roosevelt used Japan s threat of war to ask Congress to appropriate funds to expand the U.S. Navy and then sent the Great White Fleet—16 battleships painted gleaming white rather than navy grey—around the world with a dramatic stop at Tokyo Bay. The 1908 tensions with Japan had receded, though they were hardly ended.
In China, tensions were also rising against the United States. The Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists, (called Boxers by foreigners) a secret society consisting of local farmers, peasants, and others who were victims of disastrous floods and opium addiction, led the Boxer Rebellion in 1901, attacking all foreigners, including American businessmen and missionaries, whom they blamed for their plight. Although the Boxer Rebellion was quickly quashed by an international force, Chinese citizens, carrying anti-American posters and singing anti-American songs, organized a massive boycott of U.S. goods in 1905.
Woodrow Wilson's Asian Policy
While he was president, Theodore Roosevelt had insisted that the long-standing Open Door Policy allowing the United States and Britain free trade with China be continued in spite of Japans desire to dominate all Asian markets. President Taft had less lofty goals for Americas role in the world, and though he was wary of political ties, he strongly encouraged American investment wherever there was an opportunity, leading critics to call his policy dollar diplomacy. Late in Taft’s term, J.P. Morgan negotiated a large international loan to China to support the building of new rail lines there. Upon becoming president, Woodrow Wilson found himself immediately involved with Asian matters and specifically the Morgan loan. Wilsons new secretary of state, William Jennings Bryan, had deep reservations about the loan. Within 2 weeks of the inauguration, Wilson announced that the government of the United States opposed the loan because its terms undermined “the administrative independence of China.” China did not get the loan. Unfortunately, it also did not get the railroads that the loan was supposed to finance, something that weakened the country in its future dealings with Japan.
Tensions with Japan that had been brewing since Roosevelt’s time continued. Just as Wilson assumed office, the California legislature adopted a law that no one “ineligible for citizenship” could buy land in California. Since Japanese immigrants could not become citizens, everyone knew at whom the law was directed. Secretary Bryan made two trips to California to try and get the law rescinded, but failed. Japan’s government reacted angrily, as it had with school segregation in 1906, and again a war seemed possible. Wilson and Bryan did everything they could to diffuse the situation. The leaders in Tokyo also did not want a war, but in Japan, feelings of deep anti-American animosity were furthered by California’s continuing determination to marginalize Japanese immigrants.
Wilson and Bryan also tried to end U.S. control of the Philippines. They convinced Congress to pass legislation granting eventual independence to the islands, but Republican opponents succeeded in deleting any specific deadline. Only after World War II did the United States recognize the independence of the Philippines, though it had been promised in 1916.
Mexico and Latin America
The most difficult foreign policy issue for Wilson in his first term involved Mexico. In February 1913, just before Wilsons inauguration, Mexican army general Victoriano Huerta led a military coup against the elected moderate, President Francisco Madero, who was killed in the bloody overthrow. Many American investors wanted the U.S. government to support the new Huerta administration, but Wilson announced, “We can
•76 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
have no sympathy with those who seek the power of government to advance their own personal interests or ambitions. Wilson and Bryan believed that the coup was part of a battle between British and American oil companies, and they wanted none of it.
Wilson desperately wanted to let Mexico work out its own future. As he told the journalist Ray Stannard Baker, he “felt shame as an American over the first Mexican war” of 1848. He continued that it was “his resolution that while he was president there should be no such predatory war.” He also believed that a people had the right “to do as they damned pleased with their own affairs.” Baker added that the president did, indeed, use the word damned.
In spite of the president’s intentions, Americans had major investments in Mexico, and thousands of American citizens worked in Mexico as teachers, nurses, and construction workers. Wilson could not ignore the country, and he sent envoys to try to persuade Huerta to resign, but failed. He spoke passionately about “the self-restraint of a really great nation.” When a revolution against Huerta led by Venustiano Carranza and Francisco “Pancho” Villa broke out, Wilson recognized it. In April of 1914, when Wilson got word that a large shipment of European arms for Huerta’s government was on its way to the Mexican port of Veracruz, Wilson ordered the Navy to land at the port and stop the arms. The arms were stopped, but to Wilson’s surprise, Mexico did not welcome the intervention, Mexican forces fought the U.S. Marines, and 17 Americans were killed. Not only Huerta but also Carranza condemned what they called a U.S. invasion. The end result was good for Carranza. Without the new arms, Huerta resigned and went into exile, and Carranza rode into Mexico City as the victor. Argentina, Brazil, and Chile agreed to negotiate a solution, and the Americans withdrew from Veracruz.
Unfortunately, a new civil war began in Mexico when Villa split with Carranza. In March 1916, Villa, who was now leading a full-scale revolt, led several hundred troops in an attack on the U.S. border town of Columbus, New Mexico. They wanted arms that were stored at nearby U.S. Army Fort Furlong, but more important, the wily Villa wanted to create an international incident. He did not get the arms, but he did get the incident.
Wilson notified Carranza of his intention to respect Mexican sovereignty, but also ordered the U.S. Army, under General John J. Pershing, to enter Mexico and find Villa.
5 Ml
! M2
iiBi
Mexican revolutionary Pancho Villa clashed with others in Mexico but also conducted a long-running battle
with U.S. forces.	Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive En
U.S. troops, 1915-34 Financial supervision, 1916-41
N $ r 1
400 Miles j
400 Kilometers
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
U.S. attempted to buy, 1869
U.S. takes control of customs houses, 1905
U.S. troops, 1916-24
Financial supervision, 1905-41
U.S. possession after 1898
PUERTO
RICO
U.S. acquired Canal Zone, 1903 Canal completed, 1914
MARTINIQUE* (Fr.)	(
1
U.S. troops 1909-10, 1912-25, 1926-33 Financial supervision, 1911-24
BARBADOS > (Br.) TRINIDAD^
(Br.)
feci..
y
Brazil
MAP 20-2 U.S. Intervention in the Caribbean and Latin America. Between 1865 and 1933, but especially under the administrations of McKinley and the "progressive presidents"—Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson—the United States intervened regularly in the nations of the Caribbean and Latin America.
Carranza had much to benefit from eliminating Villa and stayed out of the battle. Some 10,000 U.S. troops under Pershing’s command were well-equipped with motor vehicles and airplanes, but they never found Villa though they engaged in some bloody battles as they chased him through northern Mexico for months. Eventually in early 1917, as Wilson became more and more concerned with the war in Europe, the U.S. forces withdrew without success, and Villa survived until he was assassinated in 1923.
The United States intervened in several other Latin American matters during Wilson’s administration (see Map 20-2). Bryan offered an apology to Colombia for the U.S. role in the revolution that had separated Panama and negotiated a $25 million payment to Colombia. Roosevelt was furious at an obvious slap at his administration, and his friend Henry Cabot Lodge blocked authorization of the funds in the Senate. The United States sent Marines to end unrest in Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti; they stayed in Haiti until 1934. For all of their talk of nonintervention, Wilson and Bryan seemed quite willing to intervene in the Americas.
Quick Review How would you summarize the similarities and differences in Roosevelt's, Taft's and Wilson's foreign policy? Give specific examples of ways they differed.
578 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
THE UNITED STATES AND THE GREAT WAR
20.4
Analyze the causes and consequences of U.S. involvement in World War I.
..
Just after the November 1912 election, while he was still living in Princeton, Presidentelect Wilson told one of his former faculty colleagues, “It would be an irony of fate if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign problems, for all my preparation has been in domestic matters.” It was an irony that would come to pass with a vengeance.
War in Europe
On June 28, 1914, the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir apparent to the throne of the Austria-Hungarian Empire, and his wife, Sophie, were assassinated in the town of Sarajevo by a Serbian nationalist who wanted independence for Serbia. Nothing could have seemed as far removed from the United States than the murder of members of a central European royal family. However, within a very short time, the impact of the assassination was felt everywhere in the world.
In the summer of 1914, Europe was at peace. Even so, independence movements within the Austria-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires, particularly in Balkan states (including Serbia), were challenging the empires’ central governments (see Map 20-3). In addition, a newly united Germany was angry at being shut out of the colonies in Africa and Asia by the speed with which the British and French had moved. An arms race had developed among the continent s greatest powers, and in their quest for security, European nations had developed a complex series of defensive alliances. Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Turkish Ottoman Empire were known as the Central Powers. Russia, France, and Great Britain were known simply as the Allies. All of these factors quickly led Europe to tumble into all-out war when Austria set out to punish Serbia and Russia came to the aid of the Serbians. By August, all of Europe was engulfed in what was called the Great War. (The term World War I was coined only after the outbreak of another great war in 1939, one which quickly came to be known as World War II.)
At the beginning of the war, many Europeans were caught up in patriotic fervor. Young men signed up promptly and marched off proudly. Both sides expected an easy victory. The German army attacked France by moving through neutral Belgium. It was a move that cost Germany dearly in public support, but it allowed the German army to get within 30 miles of Paris early in the war. Then an allied counteroffensive drove the Germans back, and by November 1914, both sides were dug in for the long trench warfare that would not move very much—though every small move cost thousands of soldiers their lives—until March of 1918. The long years of trench warfare were ghastly. In 1916 at the Battle of the Somme, 60,000 British soldiers were killed in a single day. In a year-long battle for the town of Verdun, a million soldiers were killed. New forms of artillery, tanks, and flamethrowers, along with the introduction of poisonous mustard gas, caused what seemed like never-ending waves of death while life in the trenches involved living for months with mud, rats, and rotten food. Despite these costs, the battle lines did not change significantly. Wilson called it “this vast gruesome contest of systematized destruction.”
The United States saw all of these developments as a distant tragedy. A young American mining engineer, Herbert Hoover, organized the Commission for Belgian Relief, which along with the American Red Cross, sent aid to people caught in the path of war. Hoover gained international fame as the “Napoleon of mercy, for his efforts. However, most Americans preferred not to get involved and agreed with U.S. ambassador to London Walter Hines Page, who said, “I thank Heaven for many things first the Atlantic Ocean.” President Wilson declared neutrality. He wanted to stay out of the war, and he understood that any European war would stir up deep tensions in a nation made up of immigrants from every one of the nations at war. Neutrality, however, would not be easy to maintain.
20.4
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 57
New states as of 1921 Border of German Empire in 1914 Border of Austrian-Hungarian Empire in 1914 Border of Russian Empire in 1914 Border of Ottoman Empire in 1914 New boundaries as a result of postwar treaties Boundaries as of 1914
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
MAP 20-3 Europe and the Middle East Before and During World War I. This map shows the areas dominated by the Austria-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires, both of which would disappear at the end of World War I. Also shown is the area in northern France where the greatest fighting of the war took place.
To Great Britain
To France |	| To Belgium
|	| To Denmark
To Romania
To Greece
|	| To Italy
The warfare on land and on the oceans around Europe cut into U.S. trade, hurting wheat farmers and cotton growers who could not get their goods to European markets. Britain began to place large orders for farm products and for munitions while using its powerful navy to maintain a blockade of the Central Powers. War-torn Britain needed money to buy these things, but when J.P. Morgan began to float large loans, Secretary of State Bryan imposed a ban on loans to belligerents, seeking the “true spirit” of strict neutrality. Bryan’s ban hurt U.S. commerce, and Britain and France claimed it was prejudicial toward them, so Bryan and Wilson announced that “commercial credit could be extended to the allies. No one understood the difference between “commercial credit” and loans, but the distinction allowed the European allied powers to get the goods they wanted, U.S. farmers and manufacturers to profit, and everyone to pretend that neutrality was still maintained.
The Wilson administration had to steer a difficult course while facing considerable internal pressures. Former president Roosevelt urged massive buildup of the army
580 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
and navy as well as a military draft, all in the name of preparedness for an eventual war on the side of the British and French. From Roosevelt’s perspective, Wilson was dangerously passive.
In contrast, Progressive Senator Robert La Follette of Wisconsin and other politicians, especially those from states with large German populations led a peace movement, fearing that Wilson was edging toward war. Jane Addams led a large woman’s movement for peace. Many union leaders saw the war as a battle between European capitalists in which the working class should not be involved. Anarchists and socialists condemned the war. Between 1914 and 1916, in spite of Roosevelt’s best efforts to build support for preparedness and war, most Americans in and out of office favored keeping as far distant from Europe’s problems as possible.
Of the many diplomatic tensions that the war in Europe created, by far the greatest had to do with the German use of a new kind of sea power—the submarine, or U-boat. Britain s navy ruled the waves, but German U-boats could glide under the waves and strike at ships bringing supplies to Britain and France. On February 4,1915, the German Admiralty announced that the waters around Britain were a “war zone” and its submarines would freely attack any ship bringing supplies to Britain. Wilson and Bryan sent a formal diplomatic note that sinking ships without warning was “an act so unprecedented in naval warfare” that the United States would hold them to “a strict accountability for such acts.” No one defined what “strict accountability” meant. Somehow, submarine warfare—having a ship struck by a torpedo seemingly out of nowhere—terrified people in a way that direct ship-to-ship combat did not. Submarine warfare also threatened the profitable U.S. trade with Britain. For Wilson, it also raised the issue of basic rights of U.S. citizens, as neutrals, to travel freely. On the last point, the president and his secretary of state differed strongly. Bryan asked “whether an American citizen can, by putting his business above his regard for his country, assume for his own advantage unnecessary risk and thus involve his country in international complications.” For Wilson, the freedom of neutrals to travel was “in the interests of mankind,” and protecting the rights of neutrals under international law was a national duty.
In March 1915, a submarine sank a small British passenger ship, the Falaba, and an American citizen was killed. Then on May 7, 1915, a submarine sank the British liner Lusitania, the grandest and fastest ocean liner then in service. The Lusitania sank in 18 minutes and 1,198 people were killed, including 127 American citizens. The United States demanded an apology from Germany. When Bryan suggested also issuing a formal warning to American citizens not to travel on ships belonging to countries that were at war, Wilson refused.
In response to the American note, the German government sent secret orders to its submarine captains to avoid large passenger liners, but their official word to the United States was evasive. Wilson promised that if Germany would give up submarine warfare, he would also press Britain to end the blockade of goods flowing to Germany and Austria, but he also prepared a second note to Germany saying that the sinking of
Lusitania involved “principles of humanity.”
Bryan argued for protesting the British blockade and for linking the second note to a policy that would bar passenger ships from carrying munitions (the Lusitania may well have been carrying munitions in addition to passengers). Wilson thought that Bryan’s plan would undermine the needed message of protest. Bryan resigned rather than sign the second Lusitania note. He told the president that he was risking war by creating a situation where a foolish move by the German government could drag the United States into a war and that he could do more for peace building public opinion outside the administration than within. Bryan s departure was a sad parting between two people who had come to like and admire each other but who deeply believed in different courses of action. Robert Lansing became acting secretary and signed the note. Congress debated but did not pass a law barring Americans from travel on belligerent ships. Sinkings and diplomatic notes continued, as did American domestic politics and new developments in Woodrow Wilson s personal life.
Especially before the United States entered World War I, songs like"! Didn't Raise My Boy to Be a Soldier" were popular among many who did not want to see young American men caught up in the fighting.
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 581
In the summer of 1914, as Europe began to move toward war, Ellen Wilson, the president’s wife of 30 years whose warmth offset Wilson s sometimes dour personality, became desperately ill. Her kidneys were failing, and through the summer, the president read diplomatic cables while sitting by his wife s bedside. She died at the White House at the beginning of August. The president wrote, “I never understood before what a broken heart meant.” Less than a year later, Wilson met a vivacious 42-year-old widow named Edith Bolling Galt and quickly fell in love. Although some in the cabinet worried about how the public would respond to a new marriage so quickly after the loss of his first wife, the two were married in December 1915. The nation had a new First Lady who would support Wilson and have a significant role in policy as war and illness later sapped his energy.
While Wilson was seeking to maintain neutrality and dealing with his personal life, 1916 was also an election year. After Ellen’s death, he had seriously considered not running, but his new personal life and his desire to see the diplomatic crisis through led him to declare his candidacy for a second term. The Republican Party was reunited and nominated Supreme Court Justice Charles Evans Hughes. Hughes had served two terms as governor of New York, but he had also been on the Supreme Court since 1910 and thus sat out the Roosevelt-Taft split. Roosevelt called him “the bearded iceberg,” but campaigned strongly for the ticket as did Taft. It was a very close contest, but in the end, Wilson carried California by 4,000 votes and, with it, the Electoral College.
A month after the election Wilson tried to broker a peace between Europe’s warring powers. He asked both sides for their demands. Germany indicated that it was willing to discuss peace, but a new British government led by Prime Minister Lloyd George said it had no interest in American mediation. Then in December, Lloyd George indicated willingness to talk while the Germans backed off. In the midst of this diplomacy, the German government made two fateful mistakes. On January 31, 1917, it announced to the United States that it was resuming “the full employment of all the weapons...at its disposal.” At the same time, German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmermann sent a secret cable to the German embassy in Mexico with an offer to the Carranza government—long estranged from Wilson and the United States—that if it would attack the United States, Germany would see to the restoration of the territory from Texas to California that had been taken from Mexico in 1848.
The British government managed to intercept and decode the Zimmermann telegram and release it to the public, turning much of American public opinion against Germany. Wilson was more concerned with unrestricted submarine warfare than any interference from Carranza. He broke diplomatic relations with Germany. He then asked Congress for authority to arm merchant ships, but La Follette and other Republican Progressives blocked the bill in the Senate. Wilson called them “a little group of willful men” and claimed the authority to arm the ships on executive authority. At the same time, other Americans, including former President Roosevelt were pressing Wilson to do more for Britain. As early as January 1915, Roosevelt, although out of office, wrote to British Foreign Minister Sir Edward Grey, calling Wilson’s lack of greater support for the British “very obstinate.” Roosevelt thought Wilson was stumbling in 1915 and was ready to march. In the end, when war came, it brought Roosevelt political and personal tragedy. Wilson would accept neither his advice to help Britain nor his offer of service, and in July 1918, Roosevelt’s beloved son Quentin was killed in combat in France.
From the German perspective, an immediate attack on supplies going to Britain and France was the only way to win the war. If they could block food and munitions from getting to the allies, then the Germans believed they could win the war before the United States could organize itself to do much harm. In March, U-boats sank three U.S. merchant ships with the loss of 15 American lives. As Bryan had warned, Wilson’s hard line meant that Germany had the initiative. The president felt he had run out of options. On April 2, 1917, Wilson appeared before a joint session of Congress and asked for a declaration of war against Germany.
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
American Voices
Woodrow Wilson, War Message 1917
llfilson had spoken directly to Congress many times before. Inf Nevertheless, when he decided that the United States needed to go to war on the side of Britain and France the words took on a new level of importance. Everyone knew what he would ask, but they waited to hear his reasons.
Gentlemen of the Congress:
On the 3d of February last I officially laid before you the extraordinary announcement of the Imperial German Government that on and after the 1st day of February it was its purpose to put aside all restraints of law or of humanity and use its submarines to sink every vessel that sought to approach either the ports of Great Britain and Ireland or the western coasts of Europe.... Vessels of every kind, whatever their flag, their character, their cargo, their destination, their errand, have been ruthlessly sent to the bottom without warning and without thought of help or mercy for those on board, the vessels of friendly neutrals along with those of belligerents....
With a profound sense of the solemn and even tragical character of the step I am taking and of the grave responsibilities which it involves, but in unhesitating obedience to what I deem my constitutional duty, I advise that the Congress declare the recent course of the Imperial German Government to be in fact nothing less than war against the Government and people of the United States; that it formally accept the status of belligerent which has thus been thrust upon it....
What this will involve is clear. It will involve the utmost practicable cooperation in counsel and action with the governments now at war with Germany....It will involve the organization and mobilization of all the material resources of the country to supply the materials of war....It will involve the immediate full equipment of the Navy in all respects but particularly in supplying it with the best means of dealing with the enemy's submarines. It
will involve the immediate addition to the armed forces of the United States already provided for by law in case of war at least 500,000 men, who should, in my opinion, be chosen upon the principle of universal liability to service....It will involve also, of course, the granting of adequate credits to the Government, sustained, I hope, so far as they can equitably be sustained by the present generation, by well conceived taxation....
One of the things that has served to convince us that the Prussian autocracy was not and could never be our friend is that from the very outset of the present war it has filled our unsuspecting communities and even our offices of government with spies and set criminal intrigues everywhere afoot against our national unity....That it means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors the intercepted note to the German Minister at Mexico City is eloquent evidence....
The world must be made safe for democracy. Its peace must be planted upon the tested foundations of political liberty. We have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities for ourselves, no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind.
Source: Woodrow Wilson, War Messages, 65th Cong., 1 st Sess. Senate Doc. No. 5, Serial No. 7264, Washington, D.C., 1917; 2 April 1917
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
As Wilson described it, what led to his decision to ask
Congress to declare war on Germany?
2.	Contextualization
How did Wilson justify American military intervention on moral ethical grounds? What does the speech tell you about Wilson's vision of America's place in the world?

The War at Home—Support and Opposition
Not everyone was convinced by Wilsons eloquence. In the Senate, Wisconsins La
Follette and George Norris of Nebraska led the opposition to a declaration of war.
Norris, a Republican long part of the Progressive movement, said, We have loaned
many hundreds of millions of dollars to the allies in this controversy. And he saw the
war as simply a way to defend those loans, insisting, “We are going into war upon the
command of gold.” He would have none of it. When the vote came, six Senators, three
Republican and three Democrats, opposed the war. In the House, 50 Representatives
voted no on the war resolution. The most dramatic vote came from Jeannette Rankin
of Montana. Rankin was the only woman in the House, elected at a time when women
in most states still did not have the vote. She was under intense pressure from some
suffragists, who planned to demand votes for patriotic women as a war measure, to
vote for the war, but in the roll call Rankin answered, “I want to stand by my country,
but I cannot vote for war. I vote no.” (In 1941, after a long absence, Rankin would
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 583
Zfi.” :
2w«2
20.4
Committee on Public Information
Government agency during World War I that sought to shape public opinion in support of the war effort through newspapers, pamphlets, speeches, films, and other media.
The U.S. government and private organizations like the Red Cross used advertising that had been effective in other sectors of American life to recruit Americans to support the war effort, as in this poster of a young woman summoning Americans to service.
584 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depressic
I
Summon you to Comradeship ititheRedCross 'i3 i

be on the floor of Congress again and would be the single no vote against U.S. entry into World War II.) Once the United States was formally at war, the previous antiwar constituency split between those including Bryan, who believed that once the United States had made the decision to go to war everyone should support the war effort, and others—from Jane Addams to Eugene V. Debs to Emma Goldman who continued to oppose the war no matter what the president asked or how the Congress voted. Despite the opposition, once the United States was formally at war in the spring of 1917, the Wilson administration set out to do everything possible to assure the support of every citizen. In his war speech Wilson had said, “If there should be disloyalty, it will be dealt with with a firm hand of stern repression.” He meant it.
To build support for the war, Wilson created the Committee on Public Information (CPI) and appointed the respected progressive journalist George Creel as its head. No one could challenge Creel’s progressive credentials as a muckraker, supporter of women’s rights, and political reformer. Creel rejected crude propaganda, insisting that “[a] free people cannot be told what to think. They must be given the facts and permitted to do their own thinking.” Creel also insisted that he and the Wilson administration would be the ones to decide what “facts” to give people and, more seriously, what alternative “facts” should be blocked.
Creel announced, “It was a fight for the minds of men, for the ‘conquest of their convictions,’ and the battle-line ran through every home in the country.” Under his leadership, the CPI hired other muckraking journalists, including Ray Stannard Baker and Ida Tarbell, and published 75 million pamphlets supporting the U.S. war effort. They recruited 75,000 “Four Minute Men,” volunteers who were ready to speak at a moment’s notice in favor of the war effort and against Germany at any theater or neighborhood meeting. He worked with the still-new movie studios to create films like The Kaiser: Beast of Berlin. Creel’s CPI launched a special “War Americanization Plan” to encourage foreign-born immigrants, especially those from the Central Powers, to buy Liberty Bonds and otherwise assert their American patriotism. He also hired Charles Dana Gibson, famous for creating the nation’s model of feminine beauty in the “Gibson Girl,” to produce prowar posters that would glorify the American war effort and call on all Americans to purchase war bonds and tend home vegetable gardens—or victory gardens—as well as for young men to serve in the army. The government also launched “war study courses” to encourage patriotism and loyalty among public school students. Creel was confident enough of his efforts that he opposed more blatant limitations on civil liberties. After the war, he wrote, “Better far to have the desired compulsions proceed from within than to apply them from without.”
Herbert Hoover, who had gained fame organizing support for people in war ravaged Belgium, became the head of the U.S. Food Administration and urged Americans to support the war by eating less and conserving more so that food could be sent to the troops or the Allies. Like Creel, Hoover believed that voluntary compliance was most effective, so he rejected rationing in favor of what he described as mobilizing “the spirit of self-denial and self-sacrifice in this country.” People got the widely touted message, “FOOD WILL WIN THE WAR—DON’T WASTE IT.” The federal government also created the Fuel Administration and the War Industries Board and took direct control of the nation’s railroads. Most of the new agencies were led by business executives, and the criticism of business leaders that had characterized Wilson’s first term virtually disappeared as the nation’s corporate elite became essential supporters of the war effort.
While Creel led the government’s “fight for the minds” of the American people and Hoover tried to change their eating habits, other self-styled patriots had their own agendas. The nongovernmental American Protective League (APL), which eventually grew to 250,000 members, included some who had opposed German immigrants or domestic political radicals and who saw the war as a time to further their agenda. APL members, without government authority, opened mail and listened in on telephone calls, looking for spies and traitors. Fearing such animosity, many German-Americans 1890-1945
were careful to demonstrate their loyalty. The Deutsches Haus of Indianapolis became the Athenaeum of Indiana; sauerkraut became liberty cabbage; and German language classes, schools, and newspapers were closed. On occasion, the split between those who supported and those who opposed U.S. involvement in the war turned violent. A few months after the United States entered the war, during the hot summer of 1917, some 2,000 members of the APL along with the sheriff of Bisbee, Arizona, raided a mass meeting of the Industrial Workers of the World—the large and radical union that strongly opposed the war—and rounded up over a thousand IWW members and supporters, a third of whom were Mexican-American, leaving them out on the desert without food or water for 2 days before letting them escape to New Mexico. A German-American, Robert Prager, was lynched by a mob in Collinsville, Illinois. An IWW organizer, Frank Little, was lynched in Butte, Montana, after he told striking copper miners that they were battling an “imperialist, capitalist war.” An editorial in the Washington Post said of the violence, “In spite of excesses such as lynching, it is a healthful and wholesome awakening in the interior of the country.”
In 1917 and 1918, Congress passed several acts to control the country’s responses to the war, including the Sedition Act of 1918 and the Espionage Act of 1917, giving the government vast new powers to limit free speech and the press that had not been seen in the United States since the Alien and Sedition Acts of the John Adams administration. The Sedition Act of 1918 made illegal “uttering, printing, writing, or publishing any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language about the government of the United States...or the military or naval forces of the United States.” Postmaster General Albert Burleson banned from the U.S. mail anything that he thought violated the act. Attorney General Thomas W. Gregory and his successor A. Mitchell Palmer prosecuted violators or left it to local U.S. attorneys to do so.
In spite of government policies and the efforts of many in organizations like the APL to force all Americans to support the war, dissenters continued to speak out. Jane Addams, leader of the Women’s Peace Party as well as Chicago’s Hull House, spoke to the City Club of Chicago just after war had been declared, saying, “That the United States has entered the war has not changed my views of the invalidity of war as a method of settlement of social problems a particle, and I can see no reason why one should not say what one believes in time of war as in time of peace....” Her words were greeted only by silence from the club women. The National Federation of Settlements, which Addams had helped to found, said, “It has been very painful to many of us who hold Miss Addams in deep affection and wholly respect her, to find that we cannot
20.4
Sedition Act
Broad law restricting criticism of America's involvement in World War I or its government, flag, military, taxes, or officials.
think or act in unison with her.”
Jane Addams continued to oppose the war and seek international mediation to end it. She not only wanted the United States out of the war but also wanted to end the war wherever it was fought. At the same time, Addams, ever the practical settlement house leader, sought to ensure that there was “bread in time of war,” no matter who needed to eat. She happily cooperated with the U.S. government s Food Administration though she objected to its slogan, “Food Will Win the War.” Nevertheless, Addams urged residents of Chicago to plant vegetable gardens and consume less so that more could be sent to those in greatest need.
While Addams was snubbed for her antiwar stance, others paid a much higher price. Radical leaders were watched carefully for “unpatriotic” words and actions.
Over a hundred IWW and Socialist Party leaders were arrested and jailed on charges of violating the Sedition Act. In June 1918, Eugene V. Debs told a huge rally in Canton, Ohio, “I realize that, in speaking to you this afternoon, there are certain limitations placed upon the right of free speech. But Debs also made it clear that he was equally as opposed to the leadership of Germany as to that of the Allies for, he said, all sides were using working people to fight their battles. So he continued, “Ihe master class has always declared the wars; the subject class has always fought the battles. In particular, he added, “[T]he working class who make the supreme sacrifices, the working class who freely shed their blood and furnish the corpses, have never yet had a
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 585
i
20.4
Schenck v. United States
The first of several decisions by the U.S. Supreme Court upholding the Sedition and Espionage Acts.
Knowing that the Americans were coming, the British and French launched a major offensive in the summer of 1917. As with previous efforts, the offensive was turned back, and the terrible losses led to mutinies throughout the French army. The Allied armies seemed to be losing the will to fight.
On Germany’s eastern front, the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia in November 1917 led to a new government that wanted nothing to do with the war. The Bolsheviks signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk which ended the war between Germany and Russia on German terms, the most important term of all being that Germany could now focus exclusively on the western front and attack France in the spring of 1918.
The treaty did not come in time to save Germany, however. By 1918, 850,000 fresh U.S. troops had arrived, and they quickly went into combat, while the German troops were exhausted by 4 years of war. For the German soldiers, the fact that they were facing so many well-armed fresh troops undermined morale as much as any specific American victories, though those victories were not without importance. At Chateau-Thierry in June of 1918, U.S. forces helped stop a German offensive toward Paris. By that fall, the Americans were part of an Allied effort that had driven the German army out of France and back inside Germany. The end was becoming clear. An armistice was signed, and on November 11, 1918, at 11:00 a.m., the guns of Europe fell silent.
Peace Talks, and the Failure of the Treaty of Versailles
No one knows exactly how many were killed and wounded in World War I or how many more died of disease and exposure. By some estimates, as many as 65 million men fought, of whom 8 million were killed. In Europe, hardly a family escaped losing
American Voices
Mathew Chopin, “Advancing Over the Top and Carrying Wounded Comrade Under Shell-Fire,” 1918
M MS.
soldiers began arriving in France in the summer of 1918 and were quickly moved to the front lines. While presidents and generals planned, those doing the actual fighting—recent arrivals to war from farms and crowded city neighborhoods—told their own stories of fighting, fear, bravery, and sorrow, including this one recorded by Mathew Chopin while still in France, waiting for a ship home in early 1919.
At early dawn we continued advancing "over the top" through clouds of gas and smoke—under rain of machine gun bullets, shrapnel and steel. The Huns [as most Americans called the Germans during the war] were shelling heavily the edge of the roadside. It was freezing cold; we were out of water and had just a small ration of salmon and hard-tack. Completely exhausted and thirsting for a drink, I remember grabbing a canteen from a passing artillery caisson to soothe my parched lips, when the explosion of a shell sent over deadly gas, getting four of our men. We got down in a valley for awhile during a machine gun barrage and then up again, firing away at the enemy as fast as our automatics could work....
So many of our men were getting wounded and as the litter-bearer was killed while going out under fire for wounded, my sergeant sent me with another man to replace him. It was a dangerous situation going over rounds of Hell, as we had to go up
and get them under machine gun and rifle fire... .We began picking up the wounded as fast as they came and bandaging those in need of first aid. It was a heartrending sight that weakened the strongest, for everywhere were wounded and lifeless forms— some all torn to pieces, their limbs and heads entirely severed from their bodies! I remember making a trip about a mile under heavy gun fire to get a wounded stretcher-bearer whose partner had been killed. He was a game little Yank, yet a pitiful sight, with his side all ripped open by shrapnel. As I laid him gently on the stretcher, I still remember his last uttered words, "Oh God, if I could only live to die at home!"
Source: Mathew Chopin, Through the Valley of Death, 1919 From www.geocities.com/ louisiana_doughboy/index.htm and cited in P. Scott Corbett and Ronald C. Naugle, Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness: Documents in American History, Volume II, 1861 to Present (Boston: McGraw Hill, 2004), pp. 109-109.
Thinking Critically
1.	Analysis
What impression of the fighting do you get from Chopin's description?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light does Chopin's account shed on the impact of new military technology on the fighting during World War I?
588 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
The peace talks at Versailles brought together a wide range of world leaders but were dominated by the leaders of Great Britain, France, and the United States.
someone, and for a generation, young women outnumbered young men by significant numbers. Ships were sunk, villages and towns destroyed, national economies wrecked. While some including Wilson wanted to use the end of the war to secure “a just and lasting peace,” others wanted vengeance, and still others wanted to forget all about war and simply have a good time in a life that they knew could be cut all too short. Amid all these conflicting political and emotional crosscurrents, leaders of the victorious nations met in Paris at the beginning of 1919 to write a peace treaty.
Woodrow Wilson, who had broken precedent early in his term by speaking directly to Congress, broke precedent again when the war ended. He sailed for Paris to personally lead the American delegation at the Paris peace talks. No American president had ever left the United States while in office, and some even wondered whether it was constitutional to do so. Wilson waived the concerns aside. Modern communications would allow him to remain in close touch with Washington while he was across the Atlantic. The British, French, and Italian Prime Ministers were all going to be present, and Wilson had no intention of handing the American role off to anyone else.
When the president and Mrs. Wilson arrived in Brest, France, on December 13, 1918, they were greeted as heroes, and they continued to be honored as they toured France, Britain, and Italy. A banner on the Champs-Elysees in Paris announced, “Honor to Wilson the Just,” and an American newspaper reporter wrote, “No one ever had such cheers.” It must have been a satisfying moment for the war-weary president. For Wilson, one ominous cloud over the negotiations
was the fact that Republicans had made substantial gains in the congressional elections of November 1918 in spite of his impassioned appeal to the voters to keep the Democrats in charge while he negotiated a treaty. Then, while he was in France in January 1919, Wilson received a telegram that his arch-rival Theodore Roosevelt had died. A reporter said he thought he saw a look of pity and then a smile of triumph on the president’s face, though Wilson was far too diplomatic to say anything.
When the Paris peace talks convened at the old royal palace of Versailles, Wilson thought he was in a very strong bargaining position given the role of U.S. resources and troops in bringing the war to a successful conclusion for the allies. His counterparts thought differently. Georges Clemenceau, the tough 77-year-old French premier, wanted vengeance for France’s terrible losses, and British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, though more moderate than Clemenceau, harbored nothing like Wilson’s generous spirit. France and Britain had lost 10 to 20 times as many soldiers as the United States, most of the battles had been fought in France, and neither leader nor their followers were in any mood to be generous. The losers—Germany, Austria, and the Ottoman Empire—were excluded from the conference. The new communist government of Russia, which had signed its own separate treaty with Germany in early 1918, was also excluded from the peace conference, and Wilson sent troops to try and support the overthrow of the communist government, which would lead to long-term tension between Russia and the United States.
Since 1916, Wilson had been telling his fellow Americans what he wanted from a peace conference. He insisted the traditional U.S. isolationism could not continue and the nation must be willing to “become a partner in any feasible association of nations to maintain the peace.” In October, just before the presidential election, he told an audience in Omaha, Nebraska, “we are part of the world.” And in January 1917, he told the Senate that the United States wanted “peace without victory.” His goal was to avoid future wars based on the “covenant of a new international organization that would ensure that “no such catastrophe shall ever overwhelm us again.
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era
Fourteen Points
The proposed points outlining peace offered by President Woodrow Wilson in 1918 after World War I; the treaty agreed to at the Versailles peace conference did not, however, include all 14.
20.4
In January 1918, as the United States went to war, Wilson outlined what came to be known as his Fourteen Points. The president said that America insisted on “open covenants of peace, openly arrived at.” The commitment to openness was a mix of Wilsonian idealism and a reaction to the release by the new Russian leader, V. I. Lenin, of secret agreements that had been negotiated by the czarist government, Britain, and France. Although he did not use the word “self-determination,” Wilson condemned old-style European imperialism and, indeed, any wars fought for territory. He insisted that the many diverse nationalities living within the Austria-Hungarian and Ottoman Turkish empires should have “an absolutely unmolested opportunity of autonomous development (see Map 20-4).” Most of all, he called for a “general association of nations” to preserve peace.
Wilson stayed at the peace conference for 6 months except for one 2-week return trip to the United States. He did not have as much success as he expected. He was not well-staffed. He found himself in painful meetings with the three European premiers who had different goals from his and who, especially Clemenceau, obviously did not respect him.
The treaty that emerged from the peace conference was, perhaps inevitably, a disappointment to everyone. Wilson got his League of Nations, which would include not just the allies—as Clemenceau initially wanted—but would be open to every nation of the world. The league’s covenant included Article X in which member nations agreed to “respect and preserve as against external aggression the political integrity and existing political independence of all Members of the League.” However, though the League now existed, Wilson had also paid a high price to get it.
Clemenceau compromised on his initial goal of dividing Germany into several smaller nation-states, but he won on achieving strict limits to German military power, temporary occupation of the Rhineland, and a “war guilt” clause, which meant that Germany should pay most of the war’s cost. Most of the world’s non-European
MAP 20-4 A Changing Middle East. While the major impact of the Treaty of Versailles was within Europe, the peace conference also created several new Middle Eastern nations, including Syria, Iraq, and Trans-Jordan—later Jordan and Israel—out of the former Ottoman Empire.
kPart VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
peoples were bitterly disappointed with the treaty. Middle Eastern and African colo-
nies that had belonged to the defeated Central Powers expected to be granted their
independence by the peace conference. Instead, they became “mandates” assigned to
various victorious powers that were supposed to grant them independence at some
unspecified future date. Japan, which had played only a modest role in the war, won
the right to continue its control over Shandong province in China, leading a young
Mao Zedong to call the treaty really shameless.” In addition, protests erupted in
India, Egypt, Korea, and China over other provisions in the treaty.
African-American leaders also protested the failure of the Treaty of Versailles to respect the right of citizens of former German colonies in Africa or mention racial discrimination in the final treaty. W.E.B. Du Bois tried to organize a Pan-African conference in Paris to protest the treaty’s failings, but the British government would not give passports to Africans from British colonies who wanted to attend, and the U.S.
State Department refused permission to American delegates, including Madame C.
J.
Walker, the first African-American woman millionaire, and journalists Ida Wells-Barnett and William Monroe Trotter. Du Bois made it to the meeting only by signing up as a cook on a freighter bound for France. During the peace negotiations, several new nations were created within Europe—
Poland, Yugoslavia, Romania, and Czechoslovakia—that were supposed to recognize the hopes for independence by ethnic groups who had been dominated by the old tottering Austria-Hungary and Ottoman empires, but the mapping of those boundaries set off its own ethnic tensions, especially for people who suddenly became an ethnic minority in a new country (see Map 20-5).
Wilson convinced himself that he had gotten as good a treaty as he could—which was perhaps true given the other actors at the peace conference—and he invested his greatest hopes in the idea that the League of Nations could resolve any remaining issues. He signed the treaty at Versailles in June 1919 and sailed for home. On July 10, Wilson personally spoke to the U.S. Senate, asking them to ratify the treaty. He reminded his audience of the nation’s high ideals in going to war and the fact that “in the settlements of the peace we have sought no special reparation for ourselves.” The key to the whole treaty and, indeed, to future peace, Wilson continued, was that the League of Nations was “the only hope of mankind.” So he begged the Senate to ratify the treaty immediately without any amendments, asking, “Shall we or any other free peoples hesitate to accept this great duty? Dare we reject it and break the heart of the world?” The Senate, which had final authority to approve any treaty, would take 8 months to give Wilson his answer.
Wilson was greeted as a hero when he arrived home in the United States, and public opinion seemed to be on his side, but there were problems lurking for the Versailles Treaty. The battle over the treaty has often been portrayed, as it was by Wilson, as one between his internationalism and an older isolationist view of America; however, the issues were more complex. Wilson had made the treaty needlessly partisan by campaigning vigorously, but unsuccessfully, for a Democratic victory in the 1918 elections and then failing to take any Republican leaders with him to Paris. He had also lost many of his strongest supporters who were disillusioned by the attack on civil liberties that he had allowed during the war and the compromises he had made at Paris. Some senators such as California’s Hiram Johnson and Idaho s William Borah opposed any binding promise to intervene in other nation s affairs. Borah said that he wanted not isolation but freedom to do as our own people think wise and just.
The greatest threat to the treaty came from Massachusetts Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, who hated the treaty and hated Wilson even more. Lodge objected to the treaty for many reasons.
He feared the treaty, he said, because it gave an international organization “the power to send American soldiers and sailors everywhere a power, Lodge insisted, which ought never to be taken from the American people or impaired in the slightest degree.
Some thought Lodge was less concerned about the league than about the insult to
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in
a Progressive Era
1
202
202
202
20.4
Changes in European boundaries after World War I BIBB Areas lost by Russian Empire BUM Areas lost by Austro-Hungarian Empire 1111 Areas lost by German Empire 1818 Areas lost by Bulgaria Names of the newly independent nations created at the Versailles Conference of 1919 are in bold
ATLANTIC
OCEAN

MAP 20-5 Europe in 1919. The Treaty of Versailles created a number of new nations in eastern Europe out of what had once been the Austria-Hungary and Ottoman empires as well as new nations in the Middle East.
people like himself who had been excluded from the treaty-making process and his personal animosity to the president. Nevertheless, Lodge insisted that the issues were beyond party, that the United States “is the world’s best hope but if you fetter her in the interests and quarrels of other nations, if you tangle her in the intrigues of Europe, you will destroy her power for good and endanger her very existence.”
592 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
As he had done at Princeton and in New Jersey state politics when he faced opposition, Wilson appealed over the heads of his immediate opponents to a wider audience, in this case, the whole nation. In the fall of 1919, Wilson began a 10,000-mile tour of the country, giving 40 speeches in 21 days to enthusiastic audiences, asking them to tell their senators to support the treaty. The public response was gratifying but did not move votes in the Senate. Ihe trip also broke the president’s already fragile health. On September 25 at Pueblo, Colorado, after a speech in which he said that with the treaty he had negotiated, “international law is revolutionized by putting morals into it,” and promising that his beloved league would “lead us, and through us the world, out into pastures of quietness and peace such as the world never dreamed of before,” he collapsed and admitted that he could not go on. After he returned to the White House, Wilson suffered a life-threatening infection and a massive stroke that left him partially paralyzed. Ihe medical conditions may also have clouded his judgment and made him more stubborn.
Ihe Senate Foreign Relations Committee recommended approval of the treaty but with 14 reservations, including one insisting that the U.S. military could not be sent to defend Article X without specific congressional approval. Wilson adamantly refused to consider the reservations. In a final vote on November 18 and 19, 1919, the Senate first came to a tie vote for the treaty with reservations—far short of the two-thirds majority needed to approve a treaty. Then on a second vote in which they considered the treaty without reservations, the Senate defeated the entire treaty by a vote of 55 to 39. Ihe League of Nations would be launched in Geneva, Switzerland, but without the participation of the United States. Wilson’s grand vision for a world at peace with the United States as a leader was dead. Many argued that the president’s refusal to compromise had been among the forces that killed it. Colonel House, who had once been Wilson’s closest confidant, wrote that he had once thought that Senator Lodge was the worst enemy of the treaty, but before the debates and votes were over, he had decided that the worst enemy had actually been Wilson himself.
With the end of World War I, Europe had a dramatically different map and the United States had a dramatically different political situation. People who had fervently gone to war in 1917 were tired and cynical by 1919. The cost of the war in lives, money, and liberties led many to question the governmental and business leaders who had been most enthusiastic about it. By 1920, many in the nation were ready to forget high-sounding idealism, progressive or otherwise. It was, perhaps, time for more joy or, at least, the election of a more genial and less idealistic president.
Quick Review How did U.S. participation in World War I shape Wilson's presidency?
CONCLUSION
During the Progressive Era, the United States began to look outward more than in the past and to extend its power and influence further across the globe. The three American leaders known as the “progressive presidents”—Theodore Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson—all spent much of their administrations dealing with foreign policy. In what some have called “the age of U.S. imperialism, the United States took control of vast new territories, including Hawaii, a number of Pacific islands, the Canal Zone in Panama, as well as Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippine Islands. Alaska, which had previously been purchased from Russia now became an official U.S. territory, Hawaii was annexed after an American-led revolt on the island, and the Canal Zone was acquired by treaty after complex negotiations with Panama and Colombia. Most of the other territories came under U.S. control as a result of the 1898 War with Spain. While Cuba and the Philippine Islands eventually attained independence, U.S. influence continued there for a long time.
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era
20,1
202
202
20.4
The increased involvement of the United States in international affairs in the late 1800s and early 1900s, and its expanded territorial reach, made the United States a major world power. Consequently, diplomatic tensions began to mount, especially between the United States and Latin America, where construction of the American-controlled Panama Canal and military interventions in Mexico, Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti created resentment. Although the United States had successfully brokered a peace agreement between Russia and Japan in 1905, further U.S. involvement in Asia coupled with anti-Asian legislation in California, embittered the Japanese. Many within the United States also opposed American involvement in the affairs of the rest of the world, especially after the 1898 War with Spain and the continued U.S. occupation of the Philippine Islands.
After the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in 1914, the Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire) went to war against the Allies (Russia, France, and Great Britain). Americans were divided about the conflict and looked to President Wilson to maintain U.S. neutrality. However, for some Americans, feelings changed when German U-boats sank three U.S. merchant ships and a British ocean liner, which killed 127 American citizens. The publication of a secret German cable to Mexico—known as the Zimmermann telegram—in which Germany promised the return of Texas to Mexico if Mexico would attack the United States, turned more of American public opinion against Germany. In 1917, when Germany expanded its submarine attacks, the United States entered the war.
Support for U.S. involvement in the war was not universal, and a large and vocal peace movement emerged. But the Wilson administration pressed for a series of laws to silence dissent. In particular, the Sedition Act and the Espionage Act gave the government unprecedented power to restrict free speech. The Supreme Court upheld these laws, and many antiwar protesters were prosecuted and jailed.
By 1918, the Allies, with support from American troops, had defeated the Central Powers and an armistice was signed. At the Paris peace talks, President Wilson hoped to secure a lasting peace and favored treaty provisions that called for a League of Nations. Republican opposition to the league blocked U.S. adoption of the treaty, and the League of Nations was launched without American involvement.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How was U.S. foreign policy between 1898 and 1918 different from that of the pre-Civil War period?
594 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Chapter 20 Chapter Review
CONTINUING
EXPANSiON_________________________________ IH
Explain continued U.S. expansion, particularly U.S. acquisition U of what would much later be the 49th and 50th states. Review Questions
1.	Cause and Effect
How did Alfred Thayer Mahan’s The Influence of Sea Power Upon History shape American foreign policy in the late 1800s and early 1900s?
2.	Contextualization
Why did Hawaii become a major focus of American activity in the Pacific in the 1800s?
THE SPLENDID LITTLE WAR...WITH SPAIN—CUBA, PUERTO RICO, AND THE PHILIPPINES,
1898____________________________ Analyze the causes and consequences of the U.S. War with Spain in 1898.
Review Questions
3.	Historical Interpretation
What role did economic considerations play in propelling America into war with Spain in 1898?
4.	Cause and Effect
How did the U.S. War with Spain and the fighting in the Philippines that followed help spark anti-imperialist sentiment in the United States?
5.	Constructing an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement. “The United States went to war with Spain to seize control of parts of the Spanish Empire, not to defend the rights of the Cuban people.”
20.2
FOREIGN POLICY, FOREIGN ADVENTURES,
1900-1914 20.3
Explain developments in U.S. policy in Panama, Asia, and Mexico between the War with Spain and World War I.
Review Questions
6.	Historical Interpretation
What does the Roosevelt Corollary tell us about the way American policy makers viewed Latin America during the early 1900s?
7.	Cause and Effect
How did American actions in the early 1900s contribute to long-term tensions between Japan and the United States?
8.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Wilson’s foreign policy in Asia with his actions in Mexico and Latin America. How would you explain the differences you note?
20.4
THE UNITED STATES AND THE GREAT WAR_______________________
Analyze the causes and consequences of U.S. involvement in World War I.
Review Questions
9.	Historical Interpretation
What factors contributed to the outbreak of World War I in 1914?
10.	Contextualization
Why did Wilson find it so difficult to maintain American neutrality?
11.	Comparison
What connections can you make between efforts to suppress dissent during World War I and earlier periods in American history when limits were placed on individual liberties?
Chapter 20 Foreign Policy and War in a Progressive Era 59!
1919-1929
21
A
Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the unique aspects of a decade in U.S. history that lasted from 1919 to 1929.
The 1920s was known as the Jazz Age not only because of its most popular music but also because jazz music provided the background to an era in which many Americans wanted to forget the past and have fun dancing, drinking, and riding in increasingly popular automobiles.
21.1
L E A R N I N
RU

THE PRELUDE—THE RED SUMMER OF
1919 Explain how events at the end of World War I shaped the decade that followed.
21.2
THE 1920s—THE EXUBERANCE OF PROSPERITY____________________________
Analyze how Prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped American culture.
21.3
THE 1920s—THE CONFLICTS ABOUT AMERICAN IDEALS________________________________
Explain the elements of discrimination, hardship, and fundamentalism that also shaped American life in the 1920s.
21.4
HARDING, COOLIDGE, AND HOOVER-NATIONAL POLITICS AND POLICIES IN THE
1920s___________________________________ Analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
Almost as soon as the era ended, journalists and historians began talking about the “Jazz Age” or simply, “the 1920s,” as a way to describe a distinct era in American history. The 11 years that was framed by the end of World War I in November 1918 and the stock market crash of October 1929 was unique in many ways. As troops returned to the Unites States from their service in Europe during World War I and as national leaders debated the Treaty of Versailles at the start of this era, many Americans wanted to forget about the rest of the world and its troubles. They expected the resulting peace to usher in a time of pleasure and plenty.
For many white middle-class Americans, the twenties were, indeed, a time of great prosperity and a time to enjoy the freedom of the Jazz Age. However for others, including many white farmers in the Midwest and South, southern black sharecroppers, and American Indians living on isolated reservations, the twenties were not prosperous at all. For many recent immigrants and for residents of small towns and rural areas the 1920s were a decade when they felt especially marginalized; when it was clear that sophisticated urban dwellers looked down on them and their cultural and religious values and their resentment took many forms. Understanding the differing experiences of those who lived through this decade is the focus of this chapter.
596 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
the prelude—the red summer of 1919
21.1
Significant Dates
Explain how events at the end of World War I
shaped the decade that followed.
When the guns of World War I fell silent on November 11, 1918, the world celebrated. While the United States had been spared much of the war’s cost, many Americans were not sure what to make of the postwar world. Some Americans had talked of socialism, even communism, since the strikes of the 1870s, but most did not follow their lead. As a result of World War I, communists had seized control of Russia. Some Americans celebrated the new Russian government, but many more feared it and wondered whether there might be links between Americas homegrown radicals and Russia. For African-Americans who had fought in the war, had risked their lives for democracy, and had seen different cultures, the idea of returning to a United States with rigid segregation generated new tensions and determination. Other African-Americans had moved North to take war-time jobs, and they had no intention of returning to the segregated South. To the surprise of some, within months of the armistice, the country quickly became a very tense place.
With the coming of peace, American workers wanted a part of the new postwar prosperity and tried to gain back the money they had lost from stagnant wages in an era of wartime inflation. In January 1919, 35,000 shipyard workers went on strike in Seattle, Washington, and a month later, 60,000 workers in other industries joined them. The week-long Seattle General Strike, when virtually no one in the city went to work, stands as the largest citywide strike in U.S. history, and it frightened many.
The Seattle strike was the largest but hardly the only strike in 1919. Textile workers in Lawrence, Massachusetts, the scene of the 1912 Bread and Roses strike (see Chapter 18), engaged in a short and successful strike to demand a 48-hour work week in January 1919. In September, the police force of Boston, Massachusetts, who had not received a raise since 1913, went on strike. Without a police force in Boston, mobs looted stores and bars, the police commissioner created a temporary voluntary force, and Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge gained national fame when he fired all of the striking police officers, saying, “There is no right to strike against the public safety by anybody, anywhere, any time.”
While people debated the right of public employees to strike, steel workers went out on strike in September 1919 after the chairman of U.S. Steel, Judge Elbert Gary, refused to meet with union representatives. A month later, coal miners walked off the job, just as the nation’s demand for coal for winter heat was beginning.
Strikes were not the only signs of political chaos in 1919. In April, bombs arrived in the mail of Postmaster General Albert Burleson, Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, several members of the U.S. Senate, Seattle’s antistrike Mayor Hanson, and federal immigration authorities and judges. Not one of them was injured, but no one ever discovered who sent the bombs. On May Day, an international Socialist holiday in honor of the Haymarket events (see Chapter 18), riots erupted in several cities, including Cleveland, Ohio, where one socialist was killed and 40 injured in a parade. A few days later, a protester in Washington, DC, was shot and killed when he refused to stand for the national anthem. The crowd applauded. The American Legion, a new organization of returning soldiers, promised to uphold Americanism and attack radicals. In Centralia, Washington, an IWW group killed four parading Legion members, and the Legion lynched an IWW organizer.
At the same time, the worldwide influenza pandemic that began in 1918 came to the United States. During 1919, half a million Americans died of the flu, many more than had died in the war. The influenza did not discriminate between young and old or rich and poor. Although its source was microbes, not radicals, the influenza epidemic contributed to the sense that something was terribly wrong in the postwar world.
1919	Palmer raids and Red Summer Major strikes in many industries Chicago race riot
1920	Eighteenth Amendment creating Prohibition takes effect.
Nineteenth Amendment giving women the right to vote takes effect Congress again defeats Treaty of Versailles Charles Ponzi's scheme collapses Warren Harding elected U.S. President
First radio broadcast as Station KDKA reports election returns
1921	Margaret Sanger founds American Birth Control League
Washington Conference agrees to limit growth of world's navies
1923	Warren Harding dies
Calvin Coolidge becomes president
1924	Calvin Coolidge defeats John W. Davis for president
1925	The Great Gatsby published Scopes trial in Dayton, Tennessee
1927	Babe Ruth hits 60 home runs Sacco and Vanzetti executed Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war negotiated
1928	Herbert Hoover defeats Al Smith for president
Mickey Mouse born

' Mi
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
The influenza epidemic of 1918 killed far more Americans than World War I—more than 500,000. Police and public officials, like these members of the St. Louis Red Cross Motor Corps, wore masks to protect themselves. Images such as this one, like the disease, helped spread fear around the country.
Palmer Raids
A series of raids by U.S. government agents in 1919 and 1920 to find, arrest, and sometimes deport people considered to be dangerous radicals.
For many Americans, the chaos of 1919 proved that there was a link between U.S. labor unions, socialists, and the Bolshevik communist regime in Russia. Communism seemed to be spreading with a revolt in Hungary and uprisings in the old capitals of Vienna and Berlin. Maybe, some said, it was coming to the United States. Seattle Mayor Ole Hanson toured the country proclaiming that he had put down a Bolshevik uprising in his city. The Los Angeles Times told people that they needed to wake up to the Bolshevik menace, while former president William Howard Taft said that the Bolsheviks were “crusaders, pushing their propaganda in every country, seeking to rouse the lawless, the discontented, the poor, the lazy, and the shiftless to a millennium of plunder and class hatred.” The Senate ordered an investigation of Russian Bolshevik influence in the United States. Attorney General Palmer presented what he said was evidence of communist influence in the country. Palmer’s proof was a witness who had heard one striker say, “The IWW was not as bad as it was
supposed to be.” It was hardly overwhelming proof of an international conspiracy. Inflation and stagnant wages seemed to have more to do with the strikes and protests than international intrigue.
Nevertheless, people were frightened and the federal government responded. The Wilson administration not only asked Congress to extend the war-time Lever Fuel Act that had prohibited the obstruction of coal distribution during the war but also asked for a peace-time sedition law to continue some of the wartime restrictions on civil liberties. Using the Lever Act, Attorney General Palmer persuaded a federal judge to issue an injunction against the coal strike. Palmer also ordered an all-out effort to find dangerous radicals and appointed a young Justice Department staffer, J. Edgar Hoover, later the first director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to lead it. By the end of November, the so-called “Palmer Raids” had led to many arrests, and 249 of those arrested who had not been born in the United States were ordered deported, among them, the well-known radical Emma Goldman, who told federal authorities:
Ever since I have been in this country—and I have lived here practically all my life—it has been dinned into my ears that under the institutions of this alleged Democracy one is entitled to think and feel as he pleases. What becomes of this sacred guarantee of freedom of thought and conscience when persons are being persecuted and driven out for the very motives and purposes for which the pioneers who built up this country laid down their lives?
Goldman and the other deportees, along with an impressive number of guards, left New York on the liner Buford, bound for exile in Russia. At the same time, Congress expelled its one Socialist member, the strongly anticommunist representative Victor Berger from Milwaukee, who had opposed the war and remarked that all the American people had gotten out of it was flu and inflation. Milwaukee was not represented in Congress until 1921. The November arrests and deportations were not the end of the hysteria. On January 2 and 3,1920, Justice Department agents led by J. Edgar Hoover arrested 5,000, perhaps even 10,000, suspected radicals in 33 cities. This second round of Palmer Raids destroyed the tiny U.S. Communist Party and caught many others. The size and scope of the raids and the lack of evidence of a widespread conspiracy undercut public support for Palmer. By the spring of 1920, more Americans were starting to question the raids. Maybe there were not as many Bolsheviks in the country as Palmer thought.
Fears about communists and labor unions were not the only concerns to rock the country in 1919. The city of Chicago had been on edge for weeks in the hot summer of 1919. While nearly 5,000 public employees—from garbage collectors and street sweepers to city hall clerks—were on strike, someone put up signs in Chicago’s black community that said, “We will get you July 4.” Somehow, the fear of communists
598 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
and the fear of expanded rights for African-Americans merged as it often did. Black residents, fearing an assault, armed themselves. Then on July 27, a black boy swimming in Lake Michigan drifted across the line that supposedly separated the races on Chicago s lakefront beaches. A white mob beat the boy to death while a policeman ignored them. Blacks attacked the policeman and the white mob.
In the days that followed, armed whites attacked Chicago’s black community, and blacks fought back. An injured black military veteran confronted a white crowd yelling, “This is a fine reception to give a man just home from the war.” The crowd beat him to death. When a group of whites drove a truck armed with a machine gun into a black neighborhood, blacks killed them. When the riot ended 5 days later, 23 blacks and 15 whites had been killed and over 500 people had been injured. Unlike previous race riots in other cities, which had been almost exclusively white attacks on blacks, the black community in Chicago had fought back. The black-owned Chicago Defender noted that “the youngest generation of black men are not content to move along the line of least resistance as did their sires.”
While the Chicago race riot was by far the worst, it was not the only one that summer. In Charleston, South Carolina, a brawl between white sailors and local blacks left two blacks dead and several white sailors injured. In Longview, Texas, a white mob beat up a black school teacher for distributing the Chicago Defender. As in Chicago, blacks retaliated. After the Washington Post published a series of stories about black crime, especially rape, a riot between white soldiers and black residents left six dead and hundreds injured.
Thirty-six blacks were lynched in 1917. In 1919, 76 lynchings were recorded, including some of veterans recently home from World War I. In one Mississippi lynching, the Jackson newspapers announced plans in advance. In September, in Omaha, Nebraska, a mob attacked the jail where a black prisoner was being held, beat up the mayor who tried to stop them, and then lynched the prisoner, William Brown. Only U.S. Army troops under General Leonard Wood brought order to Omaha. As the African-American writer James Weldon Johnson looked at the racial violence and the fear of communists that were roiling the country, often being mixed, he called the season the “Red Summer” of 1919. That Red Summer was a strange and violent start to a decade of prosperity and discontent that followed.
Quick Review To what extent did America's growing involvement in the world contribute to domestic events in 1919?
THE 1920s—THE EXUBERANCE OF PROSPERITY
21.2
Analyze how Prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped American culture.
On May 11, 1921, when Prohibition had been in effect for a little over a year, the New
York Times reported that an attractive 24 year-old legal stenographer from West 156th
Street in Manhattan, Claire Fiance, had been arrested when a detective stopped her to
ask about a suspicious looking package she was carrying and, with a bright smile and
a shake of her bobbed hair,” Fiance replied that she was carrying a bottle of whiskey
(a violation of the law that prohibited the transportation of alcohol). Fiances arrest,
and those of many more women like her, was a symbol of two of the most impor-
tant shifts in American law and culture that took place in the 1920s shifts in many
American’s attitudes toward the consumption of alcohol and toward the appropriate
role of women in American society.
During the course of the 1920 presidential campaign, the Republican nominee Warren G. Harding coined a new word that described the nation s mood. He said,
America’s present need is not heroics but healing; not nostrums but normalcy.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
21.2
Harding's normalcy
A word coined by Warren G. Harding while he was the 1920 Republican presidential candidate to convey what he thought the country wanted—a new kind of "norma I" free from war, international entanglements, and reform efforts.

20 :
Harding’s normalcy was less a return to some previously normal era than a plea to give the reforming spirit of the previous decades a rest. People were as tired of Roosevelt-era reforms as they were of Wilson s internationalism. Many wanted to enjoy themselves, take part in the growing national prosperity, and keep the reformers and the government out of their lives. There was nothing very normal about the era—especially in terms of a national law that banned alcohol, or in terms of the changing roles of women or the new technologies that changed the culture—but it seemed to summarize what many Americans wanted for themselves and their country.
Prohibition—The Campaign for Moral Conformity
Just at the time when many sought “normalcy,” the greatest reform experiment in the nation’s history—the prohibition of alcohol—took effect. Even though prohibition seemed like a reform more typical of the Progressive Era, the way prohibition was implemented was typical of the 1920s. Indeed, prohibition—and resistance to it— defined the 1920s for many.
Americans had long been fond of alcohol. But some Americans had also long worried about the nation’s drinking habits. In the 1830s, the army ended the traditional whiskey ration for the troops. By the 1850s, school children learned to read from McGuffey's Readers that included stories about the “scene of desolation” that liquor created. Some religious groups concluded that drinking and Protestant Christianity were incompatible. The Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) became the primary voice of temperance reform in Protestant America in the 1880s (see Chapter 19).
While the WCTU sought to persuade people to give up drink, a new organization, the Anti-Saloon League, sought to banish alcohol by law in the 1910s. The male-dominated league had a solid financial base, greatly helped by John D. Rockefeller, and relied on professional experts to organize campaigns, lobby legislators, and attack opponents. In political campaigns, the Anti-Saloon League supported “dry” (supporting prohibition) candidates of any party and attacked any politician it considered either “wet” (opposing prohibition) or insufficiently dry. As elected officials saw colleagues elected or defeated because of the league’s political acumen, they started to support prohibition whatever their personal feelings or drinking habits.
The campaign to prohibit alcohol can be understood as no small part of a larger effort by native-born white Protestants, especially those living on farms and small towns, to retake control of a national culture that they saw increasingly under the sway of recent immigrants. As native-born Protestant America became more and more hostile to drink, many immigrants did not appreciate the campaign for moral conformity that they saw in the prohibition movement.
The Protestant evangelist, Charles Stelzle, though a prohibition leader, was more understanding of the role of the neighborhood saloon than many of his compatriots. While many prohibitionists described saloons as dens of iniquity, Stelzle remembered growing up on New York’s Lower East Side where “the working men...held their christening parties, their weddings, their dances, their rehearsals for their singing societies, and all other social functions” in the neighborhood tavern. Saloons were often where ethnic groups could maintain language and tradition. In the evening, Germans could have their beer, Italians their wine, and Irish their whiskey, while enjoying the company of others like themselves. For people who gathered over a drink, prohibition was an attack on the freedom and acceptance they had come to America to find.
Anti-Saloon League leader, William Anderson, condemned immigrant resistance to prohibition. The Board of Temperance, Prohibition, and Public Morals of the Methodist Church said, “If it is true that foreign-born laborers are rebellious against the country because of Prohibition, it may be said that the country is not being run for their benefit. If they do not like the way things are being done let them go back
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
to Europe. As a result of statements like that, many recent immigrants experienced
prohibition as an attack on their cultures and some of prohibition’s strongest advo-
cates did little to discourage such an assumption.
With the coming of World War I, the Anti-Saloon League had made support for prohibition a test of patriotism. The league had successfully inserted a clause into the Lever Food and Fuel Control Act banning the use of grain for hard liquor, while giving the president authority to regulate wine and beer production. Wilson was no fan of prohibition, but it was hard for him to reject a call for national sacrifice in support of the war. In December 1917, Congress—with intensive lobbying by the Anti-Saloon League—passed the Eighteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibiting the manufacture, transport, and sale of liquor. The league worked quickly to ensure that the required three-quarters of the state legislatures acted and, in January 1919, Nebraska became the 36 state to ratify, putting the amendment over the line. In October 1919,
Congress passed the Volstead Act, sponsored by Minnesota Representative Andrew J.
Volstead, banning not only hard liquor (which many even among the amendment’s supporters thought was its purpose) but also wine and beer—anything with more than xh of 1 percent alcohol. Violating the law carried as much as a $1,000 fine. The U.S.
Treasury was given authority for enforcement. Like the Eighteenth Amendment, the Volstead Act did not ban the possession of alcohol, only its manufacture, transportation, and sale—a loophole that made enforcement extremely difficult. The act also allowed doctors to prescribe whiskey for medical needs and drugstores to dispense it, and it allowed sacramental wine for religious purposes and industrial use of alcohol— all loopholes that would be exploited in the 1920s.
When Prohibition took effect on January 16, 1920, Americans observed the day in widely different ways. Liquor stores sold out. People who could afford to do so filled their basements with bottles (since possession remained legal), and that night, saloons, hotels, and private clubs gave one last grand party. Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt drank champagne with former Harvard classmates at the Metropolitan Club in Washington.
Other Americans held very different celebrations. The best known evangelist of the day, Billy Sunday, told worshipers in Norfolk, Virginia, “The reign of tears is over....
The slums will soon be only a memory. We will turn our
prisons into factories and our jails into storehouses and corncribs. Men will walk upright now, women will smile, and children will laugh. Hell will be forever for rent.” In fact, Prohibition unleashed a crime wave not only because illegal liquor produced great profits, emboldening criminals to new levels of creativity and violence, but also because so many average Americans were willing to disobey the law.
A
Scandalous Age—Bootleg, Ponzi, and Teapot Dome As Prohibition began in 1920, a Chicago gangster known as “Big Jim” Colosimo owned saloons and brothels across the city. Colosimo’s nephew and business manager,
Johnny Torrio, had moved from Brooklyn to Chicago to work for him in 1909, and both men had become millionaires. Prohibition meant they had to change some of their ways, but they certainly planned to continue, expecting increased profits. One day, Torrio asked Colosimo to meet a load of whiskey that Torrio was having delivered to one of their cafes. Colosimo showed up on schedule and, as he walked through the dining room, someone emerged
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
With the coming of Prohibition, federal agents and local police regularly raided establishments that served alcohol and poured it into sewers. In spite of many such raids, alcohol consumption was hardly slowed by the Eighteenth Amendment or the Volstead Act as illegal production and sales filled the gap.
21.1
21.2
21J
21.4
from the cloakroom and shot him. Colosimo died instantly. While no evidence was ever found that Torrio or his new bodyguard from Brooklyn, Al Capone, was involved in the murder, Torrio—aided by Capone—quickly took control of the liquor business in Chicago. The Colosimo murder was only the start of the violence to come with Prohibition—all across the country. Organized crime had existed long before Prohibition, but once Prohibition took effect, criminals from Los Angeles to Boston, in powerful gangs or as individual operators, took control of the now-illegal liquor business in their cities, expanding their operations and criminal networks beyond anything seen before, often violently.
The single most violent incident in Prohibition came near its end. By 1929, Capone had consolidated his control of illegal liquor in Chicago. He also controlled much of the police force, the elected political leadership, and the courts of Chicago and had his own squad of gunmen and rumrunners to bring illegal alcohol to the city, especially from Canada. When an upstart gangster known as “Bugs” Moran tried to take part of his business away, Capone hired professional killers. On February 14, 1929, five men, two dressed as police officers, arrived at Moran’s headquarters. They lined up the seven men there against a wall, shot and killed them, and calmly drove off. That bloody St. Valentine’s Day massacre provided a fitting capstone to a bloody decade wherein gangsters killed each other and innocent bystanders. Many other people were killed in drunken brawls in the illegal saloons, or speakeasies, that proliferated or by drinking improperly made bootleg liquor that poisoned them.
By 1929, after all the killing and dying, Americans were wondering whether Prohibition was such a good thing after all. Capone’s influence with politicians and police made him safe from arrest in Chicago, but after 1929, the newly elected Herbert Hoover demanded that the U.S. Treasury Department do something to uphold the law, even in Chicago, and Capone was eventually arrested and imprisoned for income tax evasion in 1931. The liquor trade continued unabated.
While Prohibition-related crimes made the headlines in the 1920s, they were not the only criminal enterprise to flourish in a decade that many experienced as particularly lawless. In 1919, Charles Ponzi opened a new investment firm in Boston, announcing an extraordinarily high rate of return because of the skill he claimed in international trade. In fact, he simply paid old investors with money provided by new investors. Other than using the profits to live a very high life, Ponzi did not invest at all. The scheme made Ponzi rich and famous, but newspapers and bank investigators started asking questions and Ponzi’s world collapsed in August 1920. He was arrested and eventually deported from the United States. Investors lost all their money. The Ponzi scheme was neither the first nor the last time that someone tried to get rich by catering to the greed of others, but it became the term used to describe that kind of fraud.
Perhaps the largest criminal enterprise of the 1920s was conducted within the federal government itself. In 1909, the government set aside three large oil reserves, two in California at Elk Hills and Buena Vista and one in Wyoming at Teapot Dome. They were managed by the Navy Department until the Harding administration came into office in 1921.
Harding, a most genial president, hated to say no to anyone, especially old friends whom he met for poker games and illegal drinking throughout his administration. When Harding’s Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall asked to have the oil reserves transferred from the Navy Department to the Department of the Interior, Harding agreed. Fall’s long-standing ties to the oil industry might have helped him manage the national assets.
In 1922, officials in the U.S. Navy were growing nervous about the growth of Japan’s Navy and wanted some of the reserve oil pumped and transferred to Pearl Harbor. To meet the Navy s needs, Fall secretly leased the reserves to oil companies owned by his friends Harry F. Sinclair and Edward Doheny for very low rates. Ihe two pumped oil from the reserves, paying a royalty, in oil, to the Navy. The Navy got the oil it needed in Hawaii. Sinclair and Doheny made a considerable profit. After a
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
602
congressional investigation led by Montana Senators Burton K. Wheeler and Ihomas Walsh began in 1924, it was discovered that Sinclair had made a gift of $260,000 to Fall while Doheny had lent the secretary $100,000 with no interest or deadline for payment. A great deal of additional money seems to have changed hands behind the scenes as Sinclair and Doheny not only stole from the government but from their own companies. Once Congress began to unearth the trail of oil and money, what became known as the Teapot Dome scandal kept spreading. Eventually, the U.S. Supreme Court declared both leases illegal and fraudulent,” Fall was found guilty of accepting a bribe and spent a year in prison, and the Harding administration was tagged as one of the most corrupt in history.
While the Teapot Dome scandal was the largest of the Harding scandals, there were plenty of others. Harding’s appointee as head of the Veterans’ Bureau, Charles R. Forbes, managed to lose some $200 million in 2 years, buying new goods at a high price from friends and selling goods on hand as cheap surplus. The arrangement made money for his friends but cost the government a fortune. Similar scandals involved the Alien Property Custodian office, which was supposed to manage German assets in the United States, and the Prohibition Enforcement Division of the Treasury Department which, it was said, would ignore violations as long as the right amount of money was left in a fishbowl in a New York City hotel room. With senior-level officials of the U.S. government behaving in such a manner, it was no surprise that regular citizens viewed obedience to the law as optional.
r
I
21.2
Teapot Dome
The name given to a major scandal of the Harding presidency in which U.S. Navy oil reserves, including those at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, were used to enrich the secretary of the interior and his friends.
The Vote for Women
In August 1920, just months after the Prohibition amendment had been ratified, the
U.S.
Constitution was amended again to say “The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account
of sex.” The Nineteenth Amendment took effect in time for women in every part of the
United States to vote in the presidential election of November 1920. Women’s suffrage
and the new roles for women that evolved in the 1920s helped shape that decade as
much or more than Prohibition or any other development.
The women most associated with the two amendments—Susan B. Anthony and
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, leaders in the long-lasting women’s suffrage movement, and
Frances Willard of the Women’s Christian Temperance Union—all died before the
campaigns they led achieved their goals. It was Carrie Chapman Catt’s privilege to
preside over the victory. Catt was an active member of both the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union and the National American Woman Suffrage Association. The
organizations provided a network for her to meet other women, and those connec-
tions would determine the rest of her career. Catt served two terms as president of the
NAWSA from 1900 to 1904 and again during the crucial years from 1915 to 1920.
As World War I began in Europe, Catt was active in the Women’s Peace Party but
left it after the United States entered the war. Other women such as Jane Addams and
Jeanette Rankin, the first woman in Congress, continued to oppose the war when such
views were seen as dangerously unpatriotic. Catt, in contrast, demanded a suffrage
amendment as a “war measure.” If the United States was going to fight for democracy,
Catt argued, then expanding democracy in the United States to include women was
essential. In 1919, the Northeastern Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs extracted
a promise from a sometimes reluctant Catt not to agree to any compromise language
in the constitutional amendment that could leave enforcement to the states. They
knew all too well what Southern state legislatures would do with the votes of African-
American women. Sadly, after the war, Catt did all too little to support voting rights
for African-American women, South or North.
In spite of differences about the war itself, women found ways to work together.
Jeannette Rankin introduced the “Anthony Amendment,” the woman’s suffrage amend-
ment, to the House of Representatives on January 10, 1918. The amendment passed
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Tim^
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Understanding Different Perspectives on Women’s Rights
Very soon after women gained the vote, Carrie Chapman Catt helped the National American Woman Suffrage Association turn itself into the League of Women Voters and served as its honorary president until her death in 1947. Some NAWSA veterans debated whether women should affiliate with the Democratic and Republican parties or remain independent. Different women followed different courses of action.The newly organized league— initially an all-white organization—committed itself to nonpartisan education and helping women join parties and vote wisely.
While the league encouraged women to engage in politics, other women who viewed the right to vote as merely a first step toward gaining other rights, pushed for a much more militant approach to women's rights. Alice Paul led the National Woman's Party that adopted a Declaration of Principles in 1923, which in part, insisted:
In short—that woman shall no longer be in any form of subjection to man in law or in custom, but shall in every way be on an equal plane in rights, as she has always been and will continue to be in responsibilities and obligations.
In their quest for these rights, the Woman's Party began a long fight for an Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Other women took a very different view of the place of women in society. Opposition to women's suffrage did not disappear in 1920, and one antisuffrage group changed the name of its journal from Protest to The Woman Patriot: Dedicated to the Defense of Womanhood, Motherhood, the Family and the State AGAINST Suffragism, Feminism and Socialism. It was a long title but it spelled out their agenda as did a 1921 article in The Woman Patriot that said that they "fought the grant of the ballot because they foresaw that it was the logical boundary line between the old institution-of-marriage ideal of the Family as the unit of society and the Feminist revolt against nature." Battle lines of a contest that would continue for the next hundred years were being drawn.
African-American women had their own concerns. During the 1920s, rigid segregation made voting almost impossible for African-American women or men. They also faced other pressing issues as Charlotte Hawkins Brown (1883-1961) of the National
Colored Woman's Club told a conference of mostly white women that was meeting in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1920:
I came to Memphis crushed and humiliated.. ..[O]n my way to this conference...! had a premonition of trouble [as she was in a sleeping car, but found] twelve young white men sitting around. A young man leaned forward and said, "We have wired ahead to have you taken off this train. Now, we give you your choice, to get off this car right away and go into the day coach, or be taken off.".. .The leader of the crowd said, "Let's march,"and these young men got in front of us and two or three behind and we were ushered into the colored day coach....Friends, what do you say about the cold-heart-edness that we have felt?...We have begun to feel that you are not, after all, interested in us.. .We feel that so far as lynching is concerned that, if the white woman would take hold of the situation that lynching would be stopped, mob violence stamped out and yet the guilty would have justice meted out by due course of law and would be punished accordingly....! want to say to you when you read in the paper where a colored man has insulted a white woman, just multiply that by one thousand and you have some idea of the number of colored women insulted by white men.
Source: Ellen Skinner, editor, Women and the National Experience: Sources in Women's History (Boston: Prentice Hall, 2011); Mari Jo Buhl, Teresa Murphy, Jane Gerhard, editor, Women and the Making of America (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2008).
Thinking Critically
1.	Cause and Effect
How did the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment change the place of women in American political life? What aspects of women's participation in politics were not changed by the amendment?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the responses of to the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment included here. How would you explain the differences you note?

(111
the House 274 to 136. The Senate moved more slowly, but under Catt’s leadership, the NAWSA helped defeat four antisuffrage senators in November 1918, and the amendment was approved and sent on to the states in June 1919. A little more than a year later, the Tennessee legislature gave the amendment the required 36 state. On August 26,1920, the secretary of state announced that the amendment had been ratified.
That fall, more than 26 million women across the country voted in the presidential election. One of them, Charlotte Woodward, at 91, was the only surviving signer of the Seneca Falls Declaration of 1848. It had been 72 years since Elizabeth Cady Stanton and her allies proclaimed their right to vote.
604 PartVIl War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Many women in the 1920s asserted new freedoms not only in dress and style but also in claiming the right to hold a job, though too often the jobs that were available were at the bottom of the economic ladder in places like the typing pool.
s II
A
Revolution in Culture—Manners, Morals, and Automobiles Both gaining the right to vote and Prohibition played a part in fostering a new lifestyle for a generation of young women who came to be known as “flappers.” Flappers cut their hair short and dressed in ways that exposed more skin—on their necks, arms, and legs—than any previous generation. Some flappers embraced their own sexual freedom, objecting to the older rules about sexuality, and many chose to drink or smoke. Certainly the flappers of the 1920s were not the first women to rebel against the sexual double standard that made women guardians of morality. Women had broken out of assigned spheres to fight for the right to vote and for social reform. But in the 1920s, having won the right to vote, the activism of many women changed drastically.
Flappers were determined to have equal freedom as men to do as they pleased in work and in their social lives. The emergence of the flappers was one—but only one— aspect of that new activism. Preprohibition saloons and bars had been male preserves. No respectable woman would enter one. However, the illegal speakeasies that replaced the old bars in the 1920s—often in the same location—catered not only to men but also to women, and not just flappers. As Elmer Davis, a thoughtful observer of his times, said of Prohibition, “The old days when father spent his evenings at Cassidy’s bar with the rest of the boys are gone, and probably gone forever; Cassidy may still be in business at the old stand and father may still go down there of evenings, but since Prohibition mother goes down with him.”
It was not only young middle-class women—flappers—who challenged their status in the United States in the 1920s. The voices of those advocating for women had become stronger, and elected officials began to listen to the newly expanded electorate. In 1921, Congress passed the Sheppard-Towner Act providing federal funds for prenatal and infant care. In 1922, Congress passed the Cable Act, protecting the citizenship rights of American women who married noncitizens. By 1923, three women, all Republicans, were serving in the House of Representatives. Women became active in both political parties and ran for office in all parts of the country. In New Mexico, a descendent of one of the old Spanish land-holding families, Adelina Otero Warren, who had been honored for her leadership when New Mexico ratified the Nineteenth
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontei
60S1
211
21.2
American Voices
Ellen Wells Page, A Flapper’s Appeal 1922
215;
i
Middle- and upper-class young women known as flappers were the symbols of the revolution in morals that took place after World War I. In previous generations, young women from "good families," were expected to be the guardians of morality, but in the 1920s, these women became the leaders of a revolt against the social norms. Flappers wore make up and exposed parts of their bodies—necks and arms—that no decent woman of earlier generations would have shown. They stopped wearing corsets, danced closely with men, and rode in automobiles that gave them privacy. Some smoked, drank, and engaged in premarital sex. Far from hiding their revolt, they gloried in it. One self-described flapper appealed for understanding of her generation.
If one judges by appearances, I suppose I am a flapper. I am within the age limit. I wear bobbed hair, the badge of flapper-hood. (And, oh, what a comfort it is!) I powder my nose. I wear fringed skirts and bright-colored sweaters, and scarfs, and waists[blouses] with Peter Pan collars, and low-heeled "finale hopper" shoes. I adore to dance. I spend a large amount of time in automobiles. I attend hops, and proms, and ball-games, and crew races, and other affairs at men's colleges. But none the less some of the most thoroughbred superflappers might blush to claim sistership or even remote relationship with such as 1.1 don't use rouge, or lipstick, or pluck my eyebrows. I don't smoke (I've tried it, and don't like it), or drink....
I want to beg all you parents, and grandparents, and friends, and teachers, and preachers—you who constitute the "older generation"—to overlook our shortcomings, at least for the present,
and to appreciate our virtues. I wonder if it ever occurred to any of you that it required brains to become and remain a successful flapper? Indeed it does! It requires an enormous amount of cleverness and energy to keep going at the proper pace. It requires self-knowledge and self-analysis. We must know our capabilities and limitations. We must be constantly on the alert. Attainment of flapperhood is a big and serious undertaking!
"Brains?" you repeat, skeptically. "Then why aren't they used to better advantage?"That is exactly it!..."The war!"you cry."It is the effect of the war!" And then you blame Prohibition....But this is my point: Instead of helping us work out our problems with constructive, sympathetic thinking and acting, you have muddled them for us more hopelessly with destructive public condemnation and denunciation....
We are the Younger Generation. The war tore away our spiritual foundations and challenged our faith. We are struggling to regain our equilibrium. The times have made us older and more experienced than you were at our age.
Source: Ellen Welles Page, "A Flapper's Appeal to Parents," Outlook, December 6,1922.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Page define "flapperhood"?
2.	Contextualization
What does the document tell us about typical 1920s explanations of the flapper phenomenon? What was Page's attitude towards such explanations?
Amendment, ran for Congress in 1922, winning the Republican nomination but losing the final election. Had Warren won her close race, she would have been the first Latina among the first women in Congress.
In 1921, Margaret Sanger, who became a birth control advocate while working as a visiting nurse in New York City, organized a birth control conference for physicians and researchers in New York City and later the same year founded the American Birth Control League. In 1923, she opened a physician-run birth control clinic since, bylaw, only physicians, not nurses like Sanger, were allowed to dispense birth control information in the 1920s. She organized several international conferences on birth control in the 1920s. In the 1930s, she tested federal laws against the importation of foreign-made contraceptives and won. In 1942, the American Birth Control League became Planned Parenthood with Sanger as honorary chair. Planned Parenthood also supported the research that led to the first birth control pill, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1960.
While responses to Prohibition and women’s issues were changing the culture, technological changes of the 1920s also reshaped the ways Americans thought about culture and morality. For many Americans, urban and rural, the radio and motion pictures brought news of national and international events and shaped a more unified and fast-changing national culture. The relatively low-cost automobile made it possible for more Americans to travel while giving younger Americans a degree of privacy
606 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
unheard of by previous generations—especially once enclosed sedans replaced open cars in the mid-1920s. Washing machines, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and toasters, reshaped traditional housework for women. In addition, new forms of financing allowed people to buy all of these goods on installment plans, dramatically increasing consumer debt while making the new inventions available to more people.
When the nation’s first radio station KDKA in Pittsburgh began operating, broadcasting the election returns in the Harding-Cox presidential contest in November 1920, it ushered in a new era in news and entertainment. Within a very short period of time, hundreds of stations were reporting news; playing records; covering religious services, sports events, and political campaigns; and broadcasting live concerts (once they had figured out how to manage acoustical control). In 1927, Congress passed the Radio Act, which created a plan to license radio stations and regulate the wavelengths at which they broadcast. A decade after KDKA started its first broadcast, half of all American households owned a radio.
Although automobiles had already been introduced, they became increasingly common during the 1920s. Fords, Chryslers, Chevrolets, Cadillacs, Lexingtons, Maxwells, and Hudsons showed up in front of American homes. During that decade, the number of cars registered in the United States tripled from 9 million to 26.5 million.
Auto-related industries such as steel, paint, textile, and tire production along with highway construction boomed in the 1920s. Auto dealerships, gas stations, repair shops, roadside restaurants, and hotels grew. Congress provided funds for the federal Bureau of Public Roads in 1921, and metropolitan areas expanded as distances became easier to traverse. New York City built the Bronx River Parkway, connecting large parts of the city, and Los Angeles opened new highways into the heretofore farming country of the San Fernando Valley.
The 1920s was the first decade in which more Americans lived in cities and towns than on farms. It was also a decade in which suburbs expanded dramatically as the automobile and growing roadways allowed people to spread further than the train and streetcar tracks had during the first wave of suburbanization in the 1880s. The pace of suburbanization was quickened when General Motors purchased a number of streetcar companies and tore up the tracks, replacing the service with General Motors buses. From New York to Los Angeles, the nation’s trolley system slowly withered, replaced with buses that could move more freely but that later added to growing traffic congestion.
Like the automobile, silent motion pictures had been invented well before World War I, and they, too, became an important part of the culture of the 1920s. By the end of the decade, an average of 100 million Americans, out of a total population of 123 million, attended a movie every week. Movies offered fun, escape, and entertainment. For people in small towns and rural areas, movies brought the larger world into their community. After 1927, motion picture technology enabled the addition of sound and voice, and “talkies” became popular. Whether people watched the comedies of Charlie Chaplin, the cartoons of Walt Disney’s Mickey Mouse (created in 1928), the religious enthusiasm of The Ten Commandments and The King of Kings, or the sexually suggestive acting of Clara Bow and Rudolph Valentino, movies gave them new ways of looking at the world. Not insignificantly, movie theaters were air-conditioned well before most other buildings, making a summer evening at the movies especially appealing.
Movies, newspapers, and magazines such as Time (started in 1923) created an age of new heroes. Heroes seemed to be emerging all the time, including “Babe” Ruth of the New York Yankees, who hit 60 home runs in 1927 in the increasingly popular game of baseball, or boxers like Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney, whose matches generated over a million dollars in revenue, or Gertrude Ederle, the first
Listening to the radio became possible for many in the 1920s, unitiq the culture in shared information and shared tastes as never before?
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontentec^me
21.1
2T2
21J
214
Great Migration
The mass movement of African-Americans from the rural South to the urban North, spurred especially by new job opportunities that began during World War I and the 1920s.
woman to swim the English Channel in 1926, or the decade s most celebrated hero, Charles A. Lindbergh, who flew solo across the Atlantic in his airplane the Spirit of St. Louis in 1927 and was welcomed home with what was becoming a New York institution, a ticker-tape parade down Fifth Avenue.
In addition, a new form of self-defined, sophisticated culture took hold. When The New Yorker appeared in 1925, its editor Harold Ross said that it was not edited for the old lady in Dubuque,” but, rather, was “a reflection in word and picture of metropolitan life.” Part of The New Yorkers success was the guidance it gave to members-or aspiring members—of New York’s “smart set” on how to navigate the city s nightlife— which nightclubs, speakeasies, cafes, and hotel lounges provided the best entertainment, the grandest design, and (though it didn’t overtly say so) the best drinks.
The U.S. writers of the 1920s spoke to a generation and class disillusioned with the idealism of past decades as well as the business and money making that characterized so much of 1920s bourgeoisie culture. Many lived abroad and were dubbed the “Lost Generation” by Gertrude Stein, who herself lived most of her life in Paris. Among them were Ernest Hemingway and other writers as different as T. S. Eliot and John Dos Passos. Sinclair Lewis published Main Street in 1920 and Babbitt in 1922, which both looked at the stifling conformity and hypocrisy of small town America. F. Scott Fitzgerald dropped out of Princeton, where he had spent most of his college career at parties, and then described that culture he knew so well in This Side of Paradise in 1920 and The Great Gatsby in 1925. In their literature and their assumptions, the social and artistic elite who lived between the end of the First World War in 1918 and the coming of the Great Depression in 1929 lived at a unique, prosperous, and discontented moment in American history and literature.
The Harlem Renaissance and Marcus Garvey
In 1920 as in 1820, 90 percent of African-Americans lived in the South. However, by 1920, some blacks had begun to move away from rural poverty and segregation in the rural South to new opportunities in Southern cities and in the larger industrial cities of the North. Although the height of the Great Migration—the great movement of African-Americans from rural South to urban North—took place in the 1940s and 1950s (see Chapter 24), it had its beginnings during and immediately after World War I. The result was both a population shift and a cultural flowering (see Map 21-1).
World War I created new opportunities for African-Americans. As work expanded, factories in the North needed more workers. The Illinois Central Railroad, which ran straight from the heart of the cotton-growing Mississippi Delta to job-rich Chicago, enabled those who were moving. The nation’s most widely read black newspaper, the Chicago Defender, announced “The Great Northern Drive” in May 1917. The newspaper called on Southern blacks to make “The Flight Out of Egypt,” commissioned songs like “Bound for the Promised Land,” and negotiated special group rates with the Illinois Central. The paper told sharecroppers about jobs available in the stockyards and meat-packing houses in Chicago.
Black music reflected the emotions of those who moved North. The blues, music born out of gospel, ragtime, and jazz, began on back porches, small town bars and dance halls, and prison cells in the Mississippi Delta early in the 1900s. At first, blues musicians sang of hard lives in the South. John Hurt sang, “Avalon [Mississippi] my home town, always on my mind,” and Bill Broonzy sang, “Anywhere in Mississippi is my native home.” But in the 1920s, the blues moved north. Those who had sung about life in Mississippi began to sing, “I’m going to Detroit, get myself a good job. Tired of stayin’ round here with the starvation mob.”
Some 50,000 African-Americans moved from the South to Chicago during World War I and another 100,000 in the 10 years that followed. Chicago’s black population grew from 44,000 in 1910 to 109,000 in 1920 to 234,000 in 1930. During and after World War II, many more blacks would follow. In addition to Chicago,
608 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945

• w
PACIFIC
OCEAN
strong population growth [	I Mooeraje population growth
r	I Population lof
AfricabkAlnericc
MAP 21-1 People Moving in the 1920s. Many Americans chose to, or were forced to, move during the
1920s. Cities and suburbs grew rapidly.Throughout the era, African-Americans moved from the South to
Northern cities such as Chicago, Detroit, and New York. In some areas, the farmers' depression meant giving
up on cultivated land and starting over to farm another region or become a city worker.
African-Americans moved to New York; Detroit; Los Angeles; Philadelphia; Syracuse,
New York; Oakland, California; Milwaukee; Newark; Gary, Indiana; and other cities
that offered jobs and a modicum of freedom.
Cotton planters did everything possible to stop the northern migration. Ihe Chicago Defender was branded as dangerously subversive. Plantation owners opposed anything more than rudimentary education for blacks so they would have few skills to take north.
In Greenville, Mississippi, the town’s leading white citizen, LeRoy Percy, opposed the Blan because he feared that their brand of terror would lead to “an exodus within a year,” of the black people who were essential to the economy. African-Americans kept moving.
The novelist Richard Wright described the experience of many of the early migrants in his novel Native Son and his autobiography Black Boy. Wright was born to a sharecropper family in Natchez, Mississippi. He left the rural South for Memphis and then in 1927 for Chicago to experience, he said, “the warmth of other suns.” It was not an easy move. Wright remembered, “I had fled a known terror, and perhaps I could cope with this unknown terror.”
Ihe North to which the Southern immigrants came was not always a welcoming place. After World War I, some whites sought to reclaim the industrial jobs they had held before the war at the same time that wartime demand for workers ebbed. Salaries were much higher in the North, but so were rents. Living conditions in increasingly segregated and rapidly growing urban neighborhoods made for tightly packed homes.
Race riots in Chicago and St. Louis in 1919 made it very clear just how unwelcoming the North could be.
African-Americans had long lived in cities like New York, Providence, and Philadelphia. Free black communities emerged before the Civil War in places like Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Cincinnati. In 1910, only a tiny percentage of Northern
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontent
Harlem Renaissance
A new African-American cultural awareness that flourished in literature, art, and music in the 1920s.
blacks were professionals, mostly preachers or teachers in African-American churches and schools. Most Northern black men were janitors, porters, servants, or waiters while black women were cooks, laundresses, maids, or servants. Still, there was often conflict between these long-time urban blacks and the newcomers from the South who started arriving in large numbers after 1917. Each found the social and economic position of the other threatening.
Nevertheless, in spite of fear, pain, and segregation, something very important started happening in the expanding black communities of the urban North in the 1920s, most of all in New York City’s Harlem (see Map 21-2). When the philosopher Alain Locke published The New Negro in 1925, the book he hoped would define the Harlem Renaissance, he wrote that in that era, the African-American was, moving forward under the control largely of his own objectives.”
While the intellectual and cultural leaders of Harlem celebrated their Renaissance, other African-Americans, especially those on the lowest rungs of the economy, looked to the charismatic Marcus Garvey (1887-1940) to foster racial
American Voices
Alain Locke, Voices of the Harlem Renaissance 1925
hen Howard University professor Alain Locke editedVne New Negro, Voices of the Harlem Renaissance in 7 925, a collection of the work of many of the artists, poets, and novelists, whose work was part of the movement, the word "Negro" was the preferred term of respect for most Americans of African descent—just as the term "African American" would be in future decades. Locke became known as the "dean" of the New Negro movement, an artistic and intellectual flowering of an assertive new cultural identity. The acknowledged capital of this new movement was New York City's Harlem, and during the 1920s, the "Harlem Renaissance" defined elite black culture.
From Alain Locke's "Foreword"—
This volume aims to document the New Negro culturally and socially,—to register the transformations of the inner and outer life of the Negro in America that have so significantly taken place....Negro life is not only establishing new contacts and founding new centers, it is finding a new soul. There is a fresh spiritual and cultural focusing. We have, as the heralding sign, an unusual outburst of creative expression. There is a renewed race-spirit that consciously and proudly sets itself apart. Justifiably then, we speak of the offerings of this book embodying these ripening forces as culled from the first fruits of the Negro Renaissance.
From James Weldon Johnson's essay in The New Negro, "Harlem:The Culture Capital"—
In the history of New York, the significance of the name Harlem has changed from Dutch to Irish to Jewish to Negro. Of these changes, the last has come most swiftly. Throughout colored America, from Massachusetts to Mississippi, and across the continent to Los Angeles and Seattle, its name, which as late as fifteen years ago had scarcely been heard, now stands for the
Negro metropolis. Harlem is indeed the great Mecca for the sight-seer, the pleasure-seeker, the curious, the adventurous, the enterprising, the ambitious and the talented of the whole Negro world; for the lure of it has reached down to every island of the Carib Sea and has penetrated even into Africa.
In the make-up of New York, Harlem is not merely a Negro colony or community, it is a city within a city, the greatest Negro city in the world. It is not a slum or a fringe, it is located in the heart of Manhattan and occupies one of the most beautiful and healthful sections of the city. It is not a "quarter" of dilapidated tenements, but is made up of new-law apartments and handsome dwellings, with well-paved and well-lighted streets. It has its own churches, social and civic centers, shops, theaters and other places of amusement. And it contains more Negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth....
I believe that the Negro's advantages and opportunities are greater in Harlem than in any other place in the country, and that Harlem will become the intellectual, the cultural and the financial center for Negroes of the United States, and will exert a vital influence upon all Negro peoples.
Source: Alain Locke, editor, The New Negro: Voices of the Harlem Renaissance, new Introduction by Arnold Rampersad (originally 1925, new edition New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to the authors, what made Harlem different from other African-American communities?
2.	Contextualization
What did Locke and Johnson see as the hallmarks of the
"Negro" or "Harlem" Renaissance?
610 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
apcara ca ca Ss
mraEEa? EEJ Q Mp
fSnis^g
E2J ES31
IgXjE^^cal _ jQrrrx^r—nil jy< msa tTsiH B i j EEZS3 KX3 A W
——3ESZs;;iaqUfi 1=5°.
'7£o	a □ L
EZZZ] Q
Qt LjEzzoag^ laEzzmavAi
>CS3ESS3EaQ1
B E3 EZXS3 E23
^ar/T,vr:."’}fTflE73 ia E3a tSEB&SSSVsi csre?a gg^y
J £3	3 r—i m
JQtif—~11~1 HC3EZXZ3EZ31 B E23	m
>EZ3CZZ74EZ3| ffl^OEZZ7Z3EZZ3l
acacaaca
|CX3j=3C3tX3
L^ng3ECM3Eir?i E2~a'3	E?’"; r~i rr^i
E-i.<—JLZznag,
maamLJLJ!
Black Harlem, 1911
Predominantly black population
!□
-134TH
CTDCCT
iCTCZJdL
a cm cm cm f—u—nj □acmcmLJEjl §D@S§a[
cm i—o§n§[
12—IL_Icrjrr-It Irrril
c=j| laan^r
Lm,,;;) EKZZS3 CZZZZ3 EZ3 PW i EWZZ3 EZZZZ3 EZ3 E3


MAP 21-2 Harlem in the 1920s. Before World War I, only a few blocks of New York City's Harlem neighbor hood had an African-American majority. By the end of the 1920s, nearly all of Harlem, from Central Park to the Harlem River, was an African-American community, and for many—including the voices of the Harlem Renaissance but also the followers of Marcus Garvey—it was the capital of black America.
pride and self-determination. Garvey established the Universal Negro Improvement and Conservation Association and African Communities League (UNIA) in Jamaica in August 1914.
For poor blacks, especially those seeking to adjust to life in Northern cities, Garvey’s message rejecting integration with white America and focusing on self-help, self-determination, and African nationalism struck a powerful chord. At the beginning of 1918, the New York branch of the UNIA had about 1,500 members. By 1920, Garvey claimed a membership of 2-4 million in 30 branches across the country.
In the early 1920s, Garvey outlined an independent path for blacks, “not to hate other people,” but to take responsibility for their own fate. “We are organized,” he said, “for the absolute purpose of bettering our condition, industrially, commercially, socially, religiously and politically.”
Garvey was at the height of his popularity in the early 1920s.
In 1919, the UNIA purchased a large auditorium in Harlem, and in August 1920, 25,000 delegates from Africa, the Caribbean, and the United States adopted the Negro Declaration of Rights.
A UNIA
parade in Harlem included UNIA men of the African MHnMMraMK
Marcus Garvey, pictured with some of his followers, used lavish uniforms and parades to foster pride and self-confidence in his mostly poor, African-American supporters.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontei
611
Legion in uniform and a delegation of 200 women of the Black Cross Nurses marching in a show of strength and pride.
Garvey created a shipping company, the Black Star Line, to carry passengers and freight between the United States, the islands of the Caribbean, and Africa. This crown jewel of Garvey’s economic development plan was launched in 1920 and eventually owned a number of ships. It was also Garvey’s downfall. Selling stock at $5 per share, Garvey eventually collected over $750,000, perhaps much more. But whether through mismanagement or corruption, or both, the line floundered.
The Black Star Line was attacked by blacks as well as whites. In December 1920, W.E.B. Du Bois published an indictment of the Black Star Line. The finances of the Black Star Line collapsed and with it the rest of Garvey s U.S.-based efforts. He was arrested for fraud, convicted, and sentenced to 5 years in federal prison in 1923 and began serving his term in the Atlanta Federal Penitentiary in February 1925. In November 1927, President Calvin Coolidge commuted Garvey’s sentence but had him deported to Jamaica. Garvey continued to build the UNI A in Jamaica and traveled through much of the world, but his influence, though significant, declined in the United States.
Quick Review How did changes in American culture reflect the postwar desire for fun and leisure? When was that not the cause of change?
THE 1920s—THE CONFLICTS ABOUT AMERICAN IDEALS
21.3
Explain the elements of discrimination, hardship, and fundamentalism that also shaped American life in the 1920s.
While the 1920s are often remembered as the Jazz Age—the decade of Prohibition, speakeasies, new automobiles, flappers, and parties—large numbers of Americans lived quite different lives. For many, the crime and the drinking were an evil to be shunned. Some who refused to violate the Prohibition laws lived quiet and law-abiding lives; others joined organizations that were determined to enforce Prohibition, not always by lawful means. Growing confidence and hope among African-Americans particularly threatened white Southerners, and long-simmering tensions heated dangerously. Despite the relative prosperity, many people on farms and in the poor neighborhoods of big cities still lived lives of desperate poverty. In addition, many native-born Americans came to distrust and fear immigrants or those who were different, and the teaching of evolution threatened the very fabric of faith for others. These conflicts challenged core American ideals on many levels, and reactions ranged from quiet frustration to vocal defiance.
The Rise of the Ku Klux Kian in the 1920s
As Prohibition came into force, the Ku Klux Kian was also revived as a defender of Prohibition as well as an opponent of immigration, rights for African-Americans, and anything that undermined the dominance of white native-born Protestants in the nation’s life. The original Kian had been one of several white terrorist organizations that opposed Reconstruction after the Civil War, killing blacks and their white supporters and burning black schools and churches. Because of prosecution by the Grant administration, the Reconstruction-era Kian virtually disappeared in the 1870s. In 1915, a Georgian, William Joseph Simmons, inspired by nostalgia for a bygone era, recreated the Kian. During its first few years, Simmons’s Kian was an insignificant organization of a few hundred members. Then in the early 1920s, a Texas dentist, Hiram Wesley Evans, pushed Simmons aside and turned the Kian into a hugely successful hate organization aimed at African-Americans, immigrants, Catholics, Jews,
612 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
£
rX
b f f
• •
M
JM.
The Ku Klux Kian staged massive rallies and demonstrations such as this one in Washington, DC, in 1925.
and anyone who challenged the Prohibition laws.
Under Evans’s leadership, the Kian increased from
a few hundred to as many as 5 million members,
including a female auxiliary that became the sepa-
rate Women of the Ku Klux Kian (WKKK). As
the Kian struck fear into many, it enriched a few
leaders who controlled access to everything from
membership dues to Kian robes and parapher-
nalia, which had to be ordered directly from the
national headquarters.
The Kian slogan was, “One flag, one school, one Bible.” It advocated for strict enforcement of Prohibition and—ironically, some thought—a cabinet-level Department of Education that would ensure that all American children were taught Klan-defined patriotism, or “100% Americanism.”
It gave flags and Bibles to public schools while demanding the firing of Catholic and Jewish teachers. The Kian sought to require every student to attend public schools and, in Oregon, got the state to outlaw private and parochial schools, though the law was overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court before it took effect.
Most people understood that the Kian also had another agenda: maintaining rigid racial segregation and, by using terror if need be, keeping African-Americans from asserting the right to vote or getting ahead economically. If a black man was accused of flirting with a white woman, he might expect a whipping or worse from robed Kian visitors. If the Kian discovered an interracial couple, they attacked them. If a black did not want to sell land at a price offered by a Kian member, he or she might expect a lashing until agreeing to sell. In 1920, Nathan Taylor, an African-American attorney in Mississippi who previously had been protected by white attorneys was abducted by the Kian and taken out to the middle of the Mississippi River and warned that, one way or another, he was to leave the state. Preferring to leave alive, Taylor moved to Chicago.
The Kian, often with the Women of the Kian in the lead, launched boycotts of stores owned by blacks, Catholics, or Jewish people. Kian publications condemned the “foreign influence” of the Catholic Church and reprinted articles from Henry Ford’s fiercely anti-Semitic Dearborn Independent about what they called the “money grasping Jews.” The Kian’s Constitution defined a goal
to unite white male persons, native-born Gentile citizens of the United States of America, who owe no allegiance of any nature to any foreign government, nation, institution, sect, ruler, person, or people... to shield the sanctity of the home and the chastity of womanhood; to maintain forever white supremacy.
The Kian provided entertainment in isolated small towns where there was not much to do. A hundred thousand people attended a Kian rally on July 4, 1923, in Kokomo, Indiana, which featured music and food. Almost as many attended a speech by Imperial Wizard Evans at Ku Klux Kian Day at the Texas State Fair in Dallas that fall. The Kian was especially strong in the Midwest and the South, but there was Kian activity from Maine to California.
A number of groups, from the Catholic Knights of Columbus to the African-American press to the new, and specifically the anti-Kian American Unity League (AUL), began to challenge the Kian. Where the Kian spoke of “pure Americanism,” the AUL spoke of “true Americanism.” In some places, pitched battles erupted between
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontei
ie 613
21.3
eugenics
A movement that claimed scientific basis to apply Darwinian theory to the "natural selection" of the "fittest" human beings to reproduce and improve the human race.
Kian members and their opponents, but one of the most effective anti-Kian tactics was simply to find and publicize lists of members in the secret organization, asking, Is Your Neighbor a Kluxer?” Opposition to the Kian, battles among its leaders, and exposure of internal corruption all weakened the organization, and by 1930, the Kian, which had once had more than 5 million members, had dropped to 50,000. Although it did not disappear, the Kian as a power in American life was a phenomenon of the 1920s.
Eugenics and I.Q. Tests—The Science of Discrimination
It was not only the Kian that sought to marginalize African-Americans, Asians, Catholics, and Jews in the United States in the 1920s. The eugenics movement used ideas from evolutionary biology, derived loosely (inaccurately and simplistically, many said) from Charles Darwin, to “prove” that some ethnic groups were more highly evolved than others. The eugenics movement was begun in England in the 1880s by Francis Galton, who concluded that the social elite—people like himself were significantly higher on the evolutionary scale than England’s working class, who in turn were more evolved than society’s poor and criminal element. Eugenics quickly became popular in the United States. Eugenics gave a scientific patina to efforts to limit the immigration of ethnic groups from southern and eastern Europe and from Asia. Southern segregationists quickly latched on to eugenics as a “scientific” justification for racial segregation.
Margaret Sanger, the advocate for family planning and birth control, was a lifelong advocate of eugenics, particularly its focus on preventing inherited traits and weaknesses, which had been a long-used approach to agricultural breeding. The eugenics movement applied this knowledge to human concerns, including various efforts to limit possibilities for those with disabilities such as deafness or limited intelligence— the “unfit”—to procreate.
Henry Goddard, a prominent American psychologist and eugenicist established an intelligence testing program on Ellis Island in 1913, which was used to “sort” the thousands of immigrants entering the country, helping to create some of the notions about higher or lower intelligence in various ethnic groups. Efforts to predict intelligence and ability grew as a result of the development of scientific intelligence testing that began with the Army during World War I. By the 1920s, educators led by Stanford University’s Lewis M. Terman and Columbia University’s Edward L. Thorndike believed that “Whatever exists at all exists in some amount,” and that by measuring the amount of intelligence in a given child—through the newly popular IQ (or Intelligence Quotient) test—educators could assign him or her a “mental age” and sort the more advanced for college and the rest for menial jobs. These tests actually measured the kind of culturally specific knowledge that children of native-born Protestant and northern European families learned at home, so test-takers from those backgrounds tended to score considerably higher than the children of southern Europeans, who still scored higher than eastern European Jews. Those of African and Asian descent tended to score the lowest on the IQ tests. Such “science” reinforced immigration restriction and racial segregation in the 1920s.
Interest in eugenics faded in the 1930s, especially as Adolph Hitler embraced the idea in Mein Kampf and used it as the basis of his anti-Semitic and anti-Slavic efforts to achieve a “pure” race and eliminate any they considered “unfit.” IQ tests remained popular much longer, being used well after World War II to sort and track students in school. In the 1920s, however eugenics and IQ testing enforced popular opinion in the United States.
Immigration Restriction, 1924
While groups like the Anti-Saloon League and the Kian were often hostile to African-Americans, Catholics, and Jews, they found allies in Congress who were also trying to end further immigration into the country. In 1924, the opponents of immigration
614 PartVIl War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
succeeded spectacularly when Congress cut off virtually all immigration from southern and eastern Europe, Africa, and Asia. In addition to anti-immigrant groups like the Kian, labor unions and some African-American organizations feared that a never-ending stream of new immigrants could depress wages or take jobs. Cultural elitists, supported by the eugenics movement, worried that the traditional Anglo-American culture was being diluted. Hostility to new immigrants was not new. In the 1840s, the Know-Nothing Party attempted to limit Irish immigration. In 1882, Congress excluded Chinese immigrants. The largest movement to limit immigration to the United States, however, was led by the Immigration Restriction League (IRL), founded in 1894.
In 1917 on the eve of U.S. entry into World War I, Congress passed a literacy test for new immigrants over President Wilson’s veto. Similar legislation had also been vetoed by presidents Cleveland and Taft, but by 1917, the anti-immigrant vote in Congress was strong. More immigrants than expected were, in fact, literate and the literacy test did not significantly reduce the number of immigrants coming to the United States. People like Wilbur Carr of the U.S. Consular Service warned that Poland’s Jewish ghettos were about to empty into the United States after World War I, fueling new fears of a new “horde” of immigrants from war-torn Europe. In response, Congress passed an emergency Immigration Restriction Act in 1921, for the first time setting quotas for the numbers of immigrants who could enter the United States.
One of the architects of even tougher anti-immigrant legislation was Congressman Albert Johnson of Washington State. Johnson hated radical organizations like the IWW and was convinced (incorrectly) that most of its members were immigrants. He was also strongly anti-Japanese and a member of the Asiatic Exclusion League. In addition, he was influenced by the “scientists” who argued that eugenics and IQ tests proved that Asians as well as southern and eastern Europeans were inferior people to “Nordic” stock. Johnson became chair of the House Committee on Immigration in 1919 and set out to write new legislation.
In setting the quota for the number of immigrants, Johnson decided not to refer to the 1910 census, which had been the basis of the 1921 restriction but which was taken well after large numbers of Russian, Italian, and other southern European immigrants had arrived in the United States. Instead, he referred to the 1890 census, taken just before that wave of immigration, to set new quotas. Using the 1890 census, and limiting the percentage of immigrants allowed into the country to 2 percent of that number, Johnson cut the total number of immigrants allowed into the United States per year from 357,803 to 161,184. The proposed law also tilted the ethnic makeup of the new arrivals against ethnic groups that had arrived in large numbers between 1890 and 1910. Italy was cut from 42,057 immigrants per year to 3,912, Poland from 21,076 to 5,156, and Russia from 5,638 to 474. Yugoslavia, created out of the pre-World War I Austria-Hungarian Empire, was cut from 6,426 to 851 immigrants. Russian Jews, Italians, and Slavic immigrants were reduced to a trickle. In contrast, German immigration was only cut from 67,607 to 51,299 and Britain’s from 77,342 to 62,458. Northern Europeans did not generally fill their quotas, but the rest of the world was reduced drastically. Under the Johnson formula, Japan should have been allowed 240 immigrants, but Johnson insisted that the bill ban all Japanese immigration to the United States.
Urban representatives led by New York’s Fiorello LaGuardia protested. The American Jewish Committee criticized the bill. It did no good. The new 1924 immigration restriction passed the House and Senate by wide margins, and President Coolidge, who had already told Congress that “America must be kept American,” signed the bill. Although some modifications were made, from 1924 until 1965, immigration to the United States from most of Europe and all of Asia and Africa was severely limited.
The 1924 legislation, however, did not impact all immigration. It did not stop Irish immigration since large numbers of Irish immigrants had come to the United States before 1890, which under Johnson’s formula kept the quota high. It also had no
Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti's trial symbolized the fears of immigrants to some and the hopes for justice for others. Vanzetti defined the way he wanted to be remembered. In May 1927, he told a journalist who visited him in the Dedham jail, "If it had not been for these things, I might have lived out my life talking at street corners to scorning men....Never in our full life could we hope to do such work for tolerance, for justice, for man's understanding of man as now we do by accident."
impact on immigration from North and South America, since the bill allowed unlimited immigration from Canada and Mexico. Approximately 500,000 Mexican workers came to the United States during the 1920s. They filled agricultural jobs in the West previously held by Japanese immigrants as well as railroad jobs and industrial jobs in Chicago; Gary, Indiana; and Detroit, Michigan. The Mexican community in Los Angeles, a city founded by Mexican immigrants, grew rapidly.
The 1924 immigration restrictions created deep tensions between the United States and some other countries, most of all China and Japan. The government of Japan, which had sought to work with several American administrations to construct “Gentlemen’s Agreements” limiting immigration, was incensed at the disrespect in the ban of even the 200 immigrants per year that the quota would have allowed. Coming on the heels of previous insults like the 1906 segregation of Japanese students in the San Francisco public schools, the 1924 legislation contributed to deep-seated, anti-American feelings in Japan. Other governments, including those of Italy and Rumania, objected to the legislation. Nevertheless, the United States was in an isolationist mood after the end of World War I, and the protests did not stop the closing of America’s previously very open gates. Members of Congress responded to foreign protests by saying that, “the nation’s immigration laws should be made for Americans and not to please foreigners,” and “No foreign government has the right to tell the United States who we shall or shall not admit.”
Just as the United States was closing its doors, the trial of two recent immigrants polarized the nation. Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were arrested on May 5, 1920, for robbery and the murder of a paymaster and guard of a shoe factory in South Braintree, Massachusetts. They were tried in the midst of the antiradical, anti-immigrant hysteria sweeping the country and were convicted in July 1921. After a long series of appeals, reviews, and massive public protests, during which Sacco and Vanzetti maintained their innocence, their conviction was upheld and they were executed at Charlestown Prison on August 23,1927.
The case of Sacco and Vanzetti took on enormous symbolic importance during the 1920s. Opponents of immigration and of political radicalism generally assumed that they were guilty simply because they were immigrants and self-confessed anarchists. For others, winning freedom for Sacco and Vanzetti could be, depending on one’s view, a blow struck for the cause of anarchism, or for the rights of immigrants, or simply the right to a fair trial. For observers during the 1920s, the Sacco and Vanzetti case symbolized how much a nation made up of immigrants had turned against those immigrants who arrived most recently.
The Farmers' Depression
For many farmers, World War I had brought prosperity as the prices for wheat, cotton, and other agricultural products went up significantly. With new money to be found in every bushel or bale, farmers extended production between 1914 and 1918. Farmers enjoyed amenities as never before. In the early 1920s, one farm wife wrote about the “running water in the house! What a constant cause of thankfulness! What a joy to use all I need and want! No more would she have a long, hot walk to the spring for a pail of water to sooth a thirsty child or to wash a dipper because “the water from that same spring is in our pressure-tank....”
Farmers kept expanding the areas they cultivated. The rich lands of the Delta in northwest Mississippi were still more than 60 percent wilderness in 1914. Bears were seen in cornfields and wolves attacked livestock. But in the war years, the world needed more cotton than ever, and planters cleared land as fast as they could. By the war’s end, much of the Mississippi Delta was in cotton production and land sold for up to
616 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
$1,000 an acre. Agricultural centers like Greenville, Mississippi, “Ihe Queen City of the Delta,” had 15,000 people with paved streets and factories in 1920. Some 20 railroad trains stopped every day, and agents in Greenville sold cotton directly to buyers in New York, Chicago, and New Orleans as well as the European cotton markets at Liverpool, England. Prosperity, it seemed, had finally arrived in the Delta.
Similarly, in the arid cattle country of southern Kansas and the panhandle region of Oklahoma, land that had never been plowed was being turned into farmland as fast as developers and settlers could break the sod with a plow and set up windmills to bring water from deep below. Driven by the insatiable wartime need for wheat and encouraged by the Union Pacific Railroad, which brought settlers, plows, and windmills, settlers filed 53,000 new homestead claims in the Great Plains in 1914 alone. The former grassland was now producing wheat, and many families who started out living in a mud-walled dugout imagined that there was a fortune in store if only they could turn over enough sod. “Plant more wheat to win the war, the government said, and farmers in the Midwest and the Plains, happy to mix patriotism and profit, did just as the nation asked.
Then, the war ended. Europe began planting its own wheat again. Disbanded armies did not need uniforms. By 1920 and 1921, most of the world was caught up in an economic downturn that drastically reduced the demand for everything, especially wheat and cotton. The general economy started to recover in 1922 and 1923, but the farm economy did not. Even with its new prosperity, the United States could not consume all of the wheat and cotton and meat produced on the nation’s farms. For many farmers, the Great Depression of the 1930s began in 1920 or 1921.
Not all farmers were impacted in the same way. Due to the new popularity of ice cream and increased use of milk in American diets, dairy farmers prospered. Vegetable farmers sold celery, spinach, and carrots to city people who had discovered vitamins. But those producing the staple crops—wheat, cotton, and corn—did not prosper. In 1921, cotton, which had brought a dollar a pound only a year before, sold for only 20 cents a pound—if a buyer could be found. Wheat prices also fell drastically However, the price of the fertilizer farmers needed for their crops and the coal they needed to heat their homes kept rising.
Desperate to maintain their incomes, farmers did what seemed logical: they worked harder. If the price for a bushel or bale dropped, the only thing to do was to produce more. What was logical on an individual basis was disastrous on a national one. The more the farmers produced, the more the oversupply led prices to fall. There seemed to be no way to break the pattern.
Senators and representatives from the farm states were desperate for help, and Congress passed the McNary-Haugen bills under which the federal government would set a minimum price for farm products and buy them when the price fell to that level. The government would then store the goods until prices rose. But President Coolidge vetoed the bills as unsound government intervention in free markets. Midwestern progressives complained, but they did not have the votes to override the veto.
In 1927, nature seemed to turn against rural America. It rained a lot that spring. Farmers generally like spring rains, but in 1927, there was too much rain. One of the most intense storms in history came on Good Friday, April 15, 1927. In New Orleans alone, 14.96 inches of rain fell in less than a day. The Mississippi River flooded from Illinois to Louisiana (see Map 21-3). Engineers had been building levies to contain the Mississippi and its tributaries for decades, and by the 1920s, levies were everywhere. Behind the levies, farmers had cleared and planted thousands of acres of land. Cities and towns had grown up. However, prosperity, even survival, depended on the levies holding. That April in 1927, they did not hold. The flood of 1927 covered an area 150 miles long and 50 miles wide along the Mississippi River with water, some of it 20 feet deep, and made 200,000 people homeless, perhaps even three times that number. Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover directed the rescue efforts, and the Red Cross provided aid across a stricken country. Many criticized rehabilitation efforts that spent an average of $20 per flood victim as too little too late.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontent
ime
MAP 21-3 The Mississippi River Flood. This map gives some sense of the huge territory that was impacted when the Mississippi River flooded in 1927.
In the aftermath of the flood, many never recovered. Crops planted later that year were beset by disease and an early frost. Pellagra, the result of poor diet, afflicted 50,000 people in the Mississippi Delta. Farmers gave up on the land. Sharecroppers simply moved away. More blacks moved north, and more farmers—black, white, and Latino—moved to town. Soon, the generally prosperous nation quickly forgot the flood and the devastation.
The Scopes Trial
Ihe general prosperity of the 1920s drove many social changes. High schools began to spring up in small towns and scattered rural communities, offering educational opportunities that had been limited to big cities before 1920. In 1890, a total of 200,000 American youth were enrolled in high school. Thirty years later, that number was 2 million and growing—a 10-fold increase.
With the growth of high schools, some Americans started to worry about just what was being taught in them—in particular, biology. The new high school biology classes were greatly influenced by the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species, which described all changes in plant and animal life, including the emergence of human beings, as natural selection—a process by which random biological changes in individuals within a species that are beneficial for survival become passed on to subsequent generations.
The book was at once controversial, particularly in terms of its theological implications. Most scientists embraced Darwin’s work and saw no conflict between the new biology and traditional religious teachings. Even those scientists who questioned it acknowledged the important contribution. Harvard’s Asa Gray wrote a popular high school botany textbook in the late 1800s that presented evolution as showing that all life was “part of one system,” showing “One Mind.” After 1900, however, a new generation of scientists stopped talking about One Mind. George William Hunter’s textbook, A Civic Biology, simply said “Species have been modified during a long course of descent, chiefly through natural selection.”
618 PartVIl War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Popular religion was also evolving. Before 1900, most Protestants, liberal or conservative, assumed that the Bible was a fairly accurate historical record, but that assumption was challenged by German-inspired “higher criticism” of the Bible that sought to understand the Bible in terms of the social context in which it was written. In reaction, a new movement known as Fundamentalism began within American Protestantism in the early 1900s. Fundamentalist ministers called for a literal reading of the Bible and rejected any other interpretation of the “unchanged word of God.” Fundamentalism represented a new militant form of Protestantism and a much more pessimistic view of modern society. Protestants have traditionally been optimistic about the future. Fundamentalists were pessimistic about a sinful world. They saw the United States of the 1920s, with its open flouting of Prohibition laws, the questionable moral standards of the flappers, the growth of Catholic and Jewish immigrant communities, and the teaching of evolution in the schools, as full of evil.
For growing numbers of American parents and political leaders worrying about the high school curriculum, the changes in scientific thinking and the increasing influence of fundamentalism came into a dramatic collision in the trial of a local high school biology teacher, John Ihomas Scopes, in the small town of Dayton, Tennessee, in 1925. Scopes, as required by Tennessee regulations, used Hunter’s A Civic Biology textbook in his classes. In following the mandated state curriculum, he also violated a Tennessee law against the teaching of evolution.
Between 1922 and 1925, a number of states under pressure from fundamentalists, including Tennessee, outlawed the teaching of evolution. Ihe American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), however, saw these new laws as an assault on free speech and placed ads in newspapers, including the Chattanooga Times, asking for volunteers to test the law and promising legal counsel. Business leaders in Dayton, Tennessee, thought the town could use some publicity and asked Scopes if he would volunteer for the test case. He agreed, and one of the most famous trials in U.S. history resulted.
trial ofTennessee biology teacher John T. Scopes that captured national auenwu.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
ZL
Dayton and the nation got quite a show. Clarence Darrow, the best known lawyer in the country, volunteered to join the ACLU team. Former presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan volunteered for the prosecution. Every major newspaper in the country covered the trial. Most people thought Darrow got the better of Bryan in the arguments, but on the facts, Scopes was clearly guilty. Scopes admitted he had violated the law, and he was found guilty and fined $100, though the Tennessee Supreme Court threw the case out on a technicality to avoid appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, which the ACLU wanted.
Cautious textbook publishers changed their books. In future editions, A Civic Biology stopped calling Darwin “the grand old man of biology and instead simply said that he was a “leading biologist.” Evolution, which in the earlier editions had been a “wonderful discovery” now became merely Darwin’s “interpretation of the way in which all life changes.” Only in the late 1950s would a full discussion of evolution return to high school textbooks.
Quick Review To what extent were the racism, anti-immigration efforts, and fundamentalism of the 1920s the result of changes throughout the United States?
HARDING, COOLIDGE, AND HOOVER—NATIONAL POLITICS AND POLICIES IN THE
1920s 21.4
Analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
Washington Conference
A conference called by the United States in 1921 that led to the adoption of the Five Powers Treaty in 1922 in an ultimately ineffective effort to limit the growth of the world's navies and thus preserve peace.
Three Republican presidents led the United States during the 1920s. The election of Warren Harding in November of 1920 was almost a foregone conclusion given the general disenchantment with Woodrow Wilsons policies, the war, and the League of Nations. A politician who promised to return the nation to “normalcy” was just what people wanted. Harding and his running mate Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge defeated the Democratic nominee, Ohio Governor James Cox, and his running mate, the young Franklin Roosevelt, by 16 million to 9 million popular votes. In what was his last race, the Socialist Party candidate, Eugene V. Debs polled close to a million votes while still in prison for violating the World War I sedition laws. Late in 1921, Harding commuted his sentence, and Debs was freed.
Although Harding was remembered mostly for the scandals of his administration, he also made some very strong appointments. Three months after coming to office, he appointed former President William Howard Taft to the job Taft had always wanted, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, where Taft served until 1930. Charles Evans Hughes, the 1916 Republican presidential candidate, became secretary of state. Knowing that there was no chance of U.S. participation in the League of Nations but wanting to foster peace in the postwar world, Hughes called the Washington Conference in 1921 to try to end the competition among the United States, Britain, and Japan to build up their navies. To the surprise of many, the result of the conference, the Five Powers Treaty of February 1922, slowed the worldwide navy build up and established limits on battleships, battle cruisers, and aircraft carriers in a ratio of 5 each for the United States and Britain, 3 each for Japan, and 1.75 each for France and Italy. No limits were set for other types of ships. In 1922 Hughes also ended the longstanding U.S. occupation of the Dominican Republic.
Harding also appointed Andrew Mellon, one of the wealthiest people in the United States, to serve as secretary of the treasury. Mellon, who served through the Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover administrations, ensured that there was a close and comfortable relationship between government and business. He cut government spending, cut taxes, and retired half of the World War I debt while in office. He was often hailed as “the greatest secretary of the treasury ever” until the coming of the Great Depression raised serious questions about his policies. Herbert Hoover, perhaps the most liberal
620 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
member of the cabinet, served as secretary of commerce for Harding and Coolidge, encouraging cooperation between businesses to stabilize industrial production and the economy.
Harding died suddenly in August 1923, probably the result of a heart attack. His wife’s refusal to allow an autopsy led to rumors that he was poisoned or committed suicide, though there was never any evidence for either. His death came just as the Tea Pot Dome scandal was about to come to light. He was reported to have asked Herbert Hoover “what a President should do whose friends had betrayed him?” Harding was deeply mourned, but as the scandals of the Harding administration surfaced, his reputation was tarnished before the year was out.
Fortunately for the Republican Party, Harding’s vice president, the stern and distant Calvin Coolidge, had no connection to the scandals and quickly took steps to investigate them. News of Harding’s death reached the vice president while he was vacationing with his father in a rustic Vermont farmhouse. Since the house had no electricity, Colonel John Coolidge administered the presidential oath of office to his son by the light of a kerosene lamp—a reassuring image that perfectly fit the tone of austerity and adherence to old-time values that the new president wanted to set. More important to Coolidge’s success, the economic downturn of 1921 had eased, and by 1923, many Americans were experiencing an economic boom, known as the “Coolidge prosperity.” To no one’s surprise, Coolidge, a man of so few words he came to
be known as “silent Cal,” was nominated for a full term by the Republican Party in the summer of 1924.
The Democratic Party was deeply divided between a southern and western wing that was primarily white, Protestant, rural, and supportive of Prohibition and a northern wing that, though also very white, included many Catholics and Jews, and was highly urban as well as strongly anti-Prohibition. The Kian was a force at the summer nominating convention where their opposition to a Catholic candidate who wanted to repeal Prohibition made itself felt. The two leading contenders for the nomination included former Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo, a “dry” who favored Prohibition and was supported by the southern and western wing of the party, and New York Governor Al Smith, a Catholic and a “wet” staunch opponent of Prohibition. They battled for 103 ballots before the delegates turned to the West Virginia lawyer and former congressman John Davis in an exhausted compromise. Others, disgusted with both parties, rebuilt the old Progressive Party of 1912 and nominated Wisconsin s popular progressive Senator Robert La Follette for president.
Coolidge’s victory in the 1924 elections was as decisive as Harding s had been in 1920. He won 54 percent of the total with only 28.8 percent for the Democrats and 16.6 percent for the La Follette Progressives. Except for Wisconsin, which went for La Follette, Coolidge carried every state outside of the then solidly Democratic South.
The Coolidge administration took some important steps in foreign policy. Just before he took office as Coolidge’s vice president, Charles G. Dawes negotiated the so-called Dawes Plan to help ameliorate the German financial crisis brought on by the huge reparations payments to Britain and France. In 1925, Coolidge appointed Frank Kellogg as secretary of state. Two years later in 1927, French foreign minister Aristide Briand proposed a joint U.S.-French alliance, but Kellogg turned the conversation to a multilateral treaty. The Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war was signed in Paris in
/aw.Gneher.
WILL THE BRAKES HOLD?
As this cartoon shows, the Tea Pot Dome scandal that came to light in 1923 soon after President Harding's death threatened to steamroll over many leaders of the Republican Party. However, the fact that the new Republican president, Calvin Coolidge, had nothing to do with it allowed party leaders to distance themselves from the scandal and, in the end, have an easy road to the White House in the November 1924 elections.
The Kellogg-Briand Pact
1928 international treaty that denounced aggression and war but lacked provisions! enforcement.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented
621
21.4
August 1928, and eventually, 62 nations were signatories to the much acclaimed agreement. Unfortunately, unlike the plan for the League of Nations, there was no enforcement mechanism to the Kellogg-Briand Pact. While passive at home, U.S. government under Coolidge also enthusiastically encouraged engagement with Latin America, maintaining military force in some countries and doubling investment in others. After coming to office in 1929, Hoover tried to improve relations with Latin America, removing American troops from Nicaragua and Haiti. In addition, while not officially recognizing the government of the new Soviet Union, the Coolidge and Hoover administrations encouraged business investment and the Soviet government welcomed it, especially the mass-production of automobiles that they called Fordism.
The 1928 presidential election that brought Hoover to office was very different and much closer than the previous two. The tone of the contest was angrier. When Calvin Coolidge announced that he would not seek another term as president, the Republicans nominated Hoover. The Democrats, tired of their losses in 1920 and 1924, decided that Al Smith’s charisma and enthusiastic support in the North would make him a winner. After all, many asked, didn’t the South vote for the Democratic nominee no matter who he was?
On many issues, Hoover and Smith were not far apart. Hoover was more liberal than Coolidge and privately worried that the Coolidge prosperity was a balloon that would surely pop. He said that he looked forward to the day when “poverty will be banished from this nation,” though he saw business success, not government intervention, as the key to accomplishing that goal. Coolidge once called him “that damn Bolshevik.” Smith was also a friend to big business. Once nominated, Smith chose John J. Raskob of General Motors to run his campaign and included several leading industrialists in his inner circle.
Nevertheless, there were two huge differences between the candidates. Hoover was a “dry” who favored continuing Prohibition, and Smith was a “wet” committed to ending it. Hoover called Prohibition “a great social and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose.” Smith told the convention that nominated him that “there should be fundamental changes in the present provisions for national prohibition.” With many people becoming disillusioned with Prohibition, on that issue alone Smith might have had the edge.
However, another issue influenced the race. Hoover, a Quaker, was a Protestant. Smith was a Catholic. Many Catholic voters in places like Boston, New York, Chicago, and San Francisco rallied to Smith with an enthusiasm they had never shown for any previous presidential candidate. Meanwhile, in much of the nation’s Protestant heartland, Smith’s Catholicism was the heated issue of the campaign. The candidate himself thought he had addressed the issue, but as he campaigned in the Midwest and South, Smith could see burning crosses on the hillsides and his rallies were met by Kian members. At one rally in Oklahoma, Smith eyed the crowd and commented to a reporter, “I don’t know those people out there. I don’t speak their language.” On election day in November 1928, Hoover won, carrying states in the South that had not voted Republican since the end of Reconstruction and even Smith’s home state of New York. Smith won 40 percent of the vote and carried Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and parts of the South, but Hoover’s 58 percent of the vote and 444 electoral votes guaranteed that he could enter the White House with a solid mandate. The stock market responded to Hoover’s election by reaching greater heights than ever before. The new president kept his reservations about the stock market bubble to himself. The nation seemed confident in their new president, the economy, and the way society had been moving for the last 10 years. It would be Hoover’s bad luck that none of this confidence would last through his first year in office.
Quick Review How were the elections of 1924 and 1928 similar? How were they different?
622 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
CONCLUSION
Ihe 1920s marked a period of significant social and political change in the United States. This period, known by many as the “Jazz Age,” began at the conclusion of World War I and ended with the stock market crash in 1929. For many Americans, especially those in the middle and upper classes, the 1920s were a time of prosperity. For other Americans, however, the 1920s were harsh.
In the so-called Red Summer of 1919, many working people in the United States were deeply dissatisfied with the terms and conditions of their employment. They wanted their salaries adjusted to reflect the inflation generated by the war, and they also wanted a share of the postwar boom. Strikes were common as were violent confrontations between wage earners and business elites, whose fear of bolshevism intensified their opposition to organized labor. Racial tensions also boiled over in that summer, and race riots took place in cities around the country.
In January 1920 when the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution outlawed the manufacture, sale, or transportation” of any alcoholic beverage, the resulting era of Prohibition set off a wave of opposition. Bootleggers found ways to manufacture and sell alcohol in defiance of the Eighteenth Amendment, and average citizens found ways to drink alcohol as they flouted the law. The widespread prosperity and contempt for Prohibition also set the stage for other law breaking during the decade, including investment fraud and corruption in the federal government.
In this turbulent period, women gained the right to vote when the Nineteenth Amendment was passed. With their newly gained power, some younger women declared themselves to be “flappers,” flouting social conventions, and many women began reforms around prenatal care and birth control as well as other issues relevant to them. The presidential election of November 1920 was the first election in which women in every state in the United States took part.
Technological innovations combined with favorable government policies toward business resulted in high corporate profits throughout the decade. The economic growth of 1920s sustained a new mass culture focused on materialism and consumerism and was characterized by the automobile, the radio, and the movies. Social and cultural change affected all Americans. African-Americans began the Great Migration, a movement of large numbers of Southern blacks from the rural South to the urban North, which continued from the 1920s to the 1960s. Newly arriving African-Americans in the North launched the Harlem Renaissance, a flowering of black culture in music, novels, and poetry, centered in New York City’s Harlem while others became followers of Marcus Garvey.
For many other Americans, the 1920s were a difficult time. While sweeping changes of the 1920s were welcomed by many, a large portion of American society objected to what they saw as the erosion of traditional American values, leading to a resurgent Ku Klux Kian among other things. The black community faced brutal racism in both the North and the South. Race riots swept across the country from Chicago, Illinois, to Charleston, South Carolina, wherever blacks began to push for greater equality and economic opportunity. A nation built on immigration turned against immigrants, and 1924 legislation drastically reduced immigration to the United States. White farmers in the Midwest and South also suffered greatly as crop prices plummeted. The government largely ignored the plight of these Americans. Other Americans turned to a new kind of religious fundamentalism challenging such things as the teaching of evolution in the public schools.
Three Republican presidents—Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert C. Hoover—presided over the nation during the 1920s and while they differed among themselves, all three supported the growth of a business-oriented culture and saw business success as the key to prosperity for all.
TER E W
Why is the 1920s a unique era in American history?
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discon
Chapter 21 Chapter Review
THE PRELUDE—THE RED SUMMER OF
1919 21.1
Explain how events at the end of World War I shaped the decade that followed.
Review Questions
1.	Cause and Effect
What factors contributed to the Red Summer of 1919?
2.	Contextualization
How did issues and tensions emerging from World War I create the anger and violence of 1919?
21.2
THE 1920s—THE EXUBERANCE OF PROSPERITY___________________
Analyze how Prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped American culture.
Review Questions
3.	Construct an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: “If it were not for American participation in World War I, Prohibition would never have been enacted.”
4.	Historical Interpretation
What light does the Teapot Dome scandal shed on the nature of Republican government in the 1920s?
5.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the domestic ideal of womanhood of the late 1800s with the “new woman” epitomized by the flappers of the 1920s. What was new about the “new woman”?
21.3
THE 1920s—THE CONFLICTS ABOUT AMERICAN IDEALS
Explain the elements of discrimination, hardship, and fundamentalism that also shaped American life in the 1920s.
Review Questions
6.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the Ku Klux Kian of the 1860s and 1870s with the Kian of the 1920s. How did the new Kian differ from the original Kian?
7.	Synthesis
How did anti-immigrant sentiment shape the culture of the 1920s?
HARDING, COOLIDGE, AND HOOVER—NATIONAL POLITICS AND POLICIES IN THE
1920s 21.4
Analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
Review Questions
8.	Constructing an Argument
What accounts for the Republican dominance of national politics in the 1920s?
9.	Synthesis
What connections can you make between the election of 1928 and the general social and cultural trends of the 1920s?
624 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Living in Hard Times
22
1929-1939
During the Great Depression, lines of unemployed impoverished workers seeking food and shelter could be seen in cities and towns across the United States.
In late October 1929, the value of shares sold on the New York Stock Exchange, known as Wall Street, collapsed. Prices kept dropping for the next 3 years in a dizzying decline in which paper wealth simply evaporated. For most Americans, the stock market crash seemed irrelevant at first. For industrial workers, who rarely owned stock, the value of shares in the enterprises where they worked was not important, but the subsequent drop in industrial jobs as production of automobiles, radios, appliances, and clothing dried up was all too real. For many farmers in the Deep South and those trying to get by farming small mountainous farms in Appalachia, the Depression had come much earlier, beginning with the drop in agricultural prices in 1920 (see Chapter 21). For other farmers, especially those who had plowed the plains and created the wheat farms of Oklahoma and Kansas in the 1910s and 1920s, the full impact of the Depression came later. Wheat farmers struggled with the fact that a glut in the world supply of wheat kept prices low all through the 1920s, but it was with the terrible dust storms of the 1930s, storms in which the child of one farmer remembered, “you couldnt see your hand in front a’ your face,” that the full impact of the Depression was felt in this region. This chapter traces the story of the many causes that led to the long years of the Great Depression, and the impact of the Depression °n the political climate in the United States and the world.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
MHVVINM

tWWiBRiSi
THE COMING OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Explain the coming of the Great Depression and the initial response to it.
THE NEW DEAL
Explain the goals and results of the New Deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse Americans.
THE DEEP ROOTS OF WAR—THE UNITED STATES, EUROPE, AND ASIA
Analyze the international impact of the Depression, German and Japanese military expansion, and the initial U.S. response.
Chapter 22 Living in Han
625
Significant Dates
THE COMING OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
1929	Stock market crash
1930	Smoot-Hawley Tariff sets off an international tariff war worsening worldwide depression
1932	Reconstruction Finance Corporation bill signed by President Hoover
Bonus Marchers evicted from Washington, D.C.
Franklin D. Roosevelt defeats Hoover for president
1933	Banks close around country
FDR inaugurated, declared a bank holiday
First FDR press conference and fireside chat
Volstead Act amended to legalize beer
Civilian Conservation Corps and National Recovery Administration
Social Security Act and National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act) pass Congress
Roosevelt is reelected, defeating Alfred Landon
Roosevelt's court-packing plan proposed and defeated
Explain the coming of the Great Depression and the initial response to it.
The Great Depression was a worldwide crisis. The crash of the American stock market was but one of many causes of the economic catastrophe. People lost their jobs in Japan. In Chile, mineral exports, the mainstay of its economy, collapsed, leading to joblessness, and the government, which lost tax income, could do little. In Germany, already suffering from a precarious economy, industries went bankrupt and millions of workers were laid off. Industrial production collapsed in Great Britain leading to hunger marches by the unemployed. Jobs disappeared in Canada. And in the United States, the combined impact of the stock market crash (which had an impact worldwide), the continuing farm depression, and the rapid decline in industrial production led to national paralysis.
626
1935
1936
1937
The Great Crash: October 1929 and the Coming of the Great Depression
Speculative booms and busts had occurred regularly in economies (and continue even in modern times) as people allowed prices to rise far beyond value and then the inevitable crash in prices came. In the 1600s, Dutch investors were caught up in speculation in tulip bulbs, and in the 1720s, English investors lost fortunes in what came to be known as the Great South Sea Bubble. In the mid-1920s, many Americans began to buy Florida real estate that later became worthless.
The Great Crash of 1929 was a prime example of this phenomenon. The U.S. economy did well in the 1920s, and it would have been strange if the value of stocks had not gone up. Stocks, after all, are merely partial ownership in a company, so a share of stock purchased on the New York Stock Exchange for a company (U.S. Steel or General Electric, for example) is a share in the ownership of that company. If the company makes a sufficient profit, dividends are paid to shareholders. If a company increases in value, the value of each share increases. However, if a company does poorly, or a lot of people start to worry that a company will do poorly, shares will probably decrease in value. The stock market is—in theory—a place where people who want to sell a share of stock meet people who want to buy one and agree on a price; the price of the most recent sale of stock is then listed as the current value of the stock.
During the 1920s, stock prices generally rose, with some modest downturns between 1924 and 1928. Toward the end of 1928, especially after Herbert Hoover’s election victory in November, the stock market started going up much faster. Many people-including president-elect Hoover, as he later wrote in his memoirs—were worried that the prices were showing all the hallmarks of a speculative boom. Still, people continued to buy stocks. The Radio Corporation of America, known on the stock market simply as “Radio,” was a relatively new company that had never paid a dividend. Radio sold for $85 a share at the beginning of the year, and the price rose to $420 a share by the end of the year. (Stock prices are reported simply as whole numbers, so Radio sold for 85 and 420.) Other companies followed the same course: DuPont began the year at 310, ending at 525; department store giant Montgomery Ward began at 117, ending at 440. At the height of the market in September 1929, still without distributing a single dividend, Radio was selling for 505.
As people saw the chance to make money, they also borrowed money to buy stocks, a process called buying on margin. If a person could invest $85 in Radio and a year later have a stock worth $420, why not borrow enough to buy ten shares for $850 and fairly quickly reap $4,200? And brokers were more than happy to lend the money. Buyers were expected to use their own money for 25 percent to 50 percent of the value of a stock but could easily borrow the rest. Early in the 1920s, perhaps a billion dollars of loans were provided to cover stock purchases; by the end of 1928, those loans reached six billion dollars. Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
In the spring of 1929, the outgoing President Calvin Coolidge reported that the economy was absolutely sound, and stocks were “cheap at current prices.” The more cautious Hoover, who understood economics better than his predecessor, believed instead that the growing tide of speculation” was not merely a problem but was, indeed, a “crime, yet worried that his saying so might cause a devastating loss in confidence. By September 1929, a respected economist Roger Babson warned, “Sooner or later a crash is coming and it may be terrific. Factories will shut down, he predicted, and “men will be thrown out of work. The speech precipitated a drop in stock prices, but the so-called “Babson Break lasted only for 1 day. Most economists thought Babson was wrong.
Stock prices kept going up through the spring of 1929, and then in the summer they skyrocketed. From the beginning of June to the end of August, Westinghouse stock went from 151 to 286, General Electric from 268 to 391, and U.S. Steel from 165 to 258. At the sight of those kinds of profits, most investors simply forgot about the warnings.
The market reached its high point on the day after Labor Day in 1929. There was a small downturn in September and by October, everyone started to worry. Then in late October, speculation turned to panic as stock prices just kept falling. Tuesday, October 29, known as Black Tuesday, was the worst single day in the history of the stock exchange. Crowds formed all up and down Wall Street. Contrary to contemporary rumors and latter-day myths, there were no suicidal leaps from windows, though a few speculators did die by their own hand on that and the following days. Most quietly watched their life savings disappear as prices continued to fall.
In the months and years that followed, stock prices continued to fall. On November 11, the New York Times Industrial Average closed at 224; a drop by half from 452 from September. The worst possible news was followed by even worse news as prices kept falling through 1930,1931, and 1932. By July 1932, the New York Times reported the Dow Jones Industrial Average as 58—a little more than a tenth of what it had been only 3 years earlier. Value, it seemed, had simply disappeared from American businesses.
Ihe loans that had enabled many to buy stock “on margins” made things worse. When the value of a stock fell to the actual percentage the buyer had invested, 50 percent or 25 percent, the stock broker who had arranged the loan would notify the owner that he or she had to produce more money to
pay off the loan or else the stock would be taken over by the broker and sold to recoup the loan. Since many investors had put all their savings into the stock market, they had no funds to cover such “calls” and were wiped out. Even if the market later rallied, they had no investment left. In addition, the brokers often were not able to sell the stock in time to protect the loan either, so brokers lost money, too.
The stock market crash was far from the only problem with the nation’s economy in 1929. At the same time, basic underpinnings of the American economy, including banking, manufacturing, farming, and international trade, were also surprisingly fragile. When the economy came apart, it came apart thoroughly. A sizable number of Americans, perhaps as many as half—farmers, farm workers, and sharecroppers; American Indians living on reservations; factory workers; widows; and the elderly—had been living on the edge of poverty throughout the boom.
22.1
222
223
In early 1932, U.S. Army troops and local police attacked the Bonus Marchers camp within sight of the U.S. Capitol Building. The attack on former soldiers who had come to Washington from all parts of the United States seeking pensions from Congress infuriated many and further undermined Hoover's reputation.
Hoovervilles
Shantytowns, sarcastically named after President Hoover, in which unemployed and homeless people lived in makeshift shacks, tents, and boxes. Hoovervilles cropped up in many cities in 1930 and 1931.
Bonus Army
A protest movement of World War I veterans in 1932 demanding early payment of service bonuses not due until 1945 to help them through the Great Depression and to provide a stimulus for the economy.
In 1930, before even the initial impact of the Depression, 60 percent of American families had a total income of less than $2,000 per year, which was then considered the poverty line.
Between 1929 and 1932, farms across the country were foreclosed on—and more would have been had not armed groups of farmers banded together to prevent the sales. Factories, which had been overproducing, now closed and workers lost their jobs. One out of four people in the United States was out of work by 1932. Many were living in shanties, and others rode the rails as stowaways or waited in bread lines. In the winter of 1932-33, the nation’s banking system started to collapse as banks that had also invested in stocks or offered mortgage loans on property that was now worthless failed, and state governors announced “bank holidays in their states to stop further failures.
The Hoover Years, 1929-1933
Herbert Hoover had been president for only 7 months when the stock market crashed. Given his background, Hoover seemed the ideal president for a moment of crisis. As a trained engineer who had helped feed a starving Europe during World War I and served as Secretary of Commerce, he understood economics; moreover, he was far more flexible than Coolidge. As the economy worsened, Hoover called on people to engage in voluntary collective action—asking business leaders to keep wages and prices up, asking bankers to pool resources to help weaker banks, encouraging farmers to form cooperatives and keep excess crops off the market. He cut taxes and supported federal public works such as construction of dams, bridges, and hospitals to stimulate the economy. After 1932, he reluctantly agreed with a Democratic Congress to create the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to provide funds to keep banks and railroads from bankruptcy as well as the Emergency Relief and Construction Act to lend money to states for relief and public projects.
As the economy worsened, however, Hoover’s call for voluntary solutions seemed weak. Farmers were reluctant to cut back on their crops if their neighbors would simply fill the gap. Bankers were too worried about staying solvent to bail out other banks. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation never invested enough to save all the banks that needed saving. Hoover tried but failed to negotiate a reduction in the reparations that were wrecking the German economy and thus undermining U.S. trade with Europe. Then in 1930, Congress passed the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, a disastrous move that was designed to protect American industries by raising the cost of imported goods, but resulted in a trade war as other nations also raised their tariffs in return, leading to a huge decrease in international trade with devastating results. Despite the dire circumstances, Hoover, though no orthodox conservative, could not bring himself to support further government intervention and debt.
Perhaps it was simply Hoover’s bad luck to preside over the beginning of the Depression. People would have blamed him no matter what he did. When he tried to restore confidence by announcing that, “The fundamental business of the country, that is production and distribution of commodities, is on a sound and prosperous basis,” things just kept getting worse and people lost confidence in him. When homeless families built communities of shacks, they called them Hoovervilles. When out-of-work veterans marched to Washington as the “Bonus Army” to demand a pension, he ordered the army to disperse them and people called him heartless. When he had lost his bid for reelection and tried to get the incoming administration to cooperate on a plan for the banking crisis in early 1933, Roosevelt ignored him. Hoover’s was an unhappy presidency in an unhappy time.
22.1
Quick Review How did the fragile economy of the 1920s combined with the stock market crash create a dire situation for the American people? What actions did the Hoover administration take to address the situation? What other actions could Hoover have taken?
628 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
THE NEW DEAL
Explain the goals and results of the New Deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse Americans.
In the desperate situation that the United States faced in 1932, probably the most desperate economic moment in American history, most thought that whoever won the 1932 Democratic nomination would win the election. After all, the crisis had occurred under the leadership of previous Republican presidents. Among the Democrats, A1 Smith entered the race again along with Speaker of the House of Representatives John Nance Garner, former cabinet member Newton Baker, and New York Governor Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Roosevelt won the nomination on the fourth ballot and, breaking precedent, flew to the Democratic National Convention in Chicago to accept the nomination in person on July 2, 1932, where he promised a “New Deal for the American people, coining the phrase by which his administration would be known. He selected Garner to be his running mate and, promising “a New Deal for the American people while offering very few specifics, defeated Hoover by a landslide in the November election, carrying 57 percent of the vote and 472 electoral votes.
In the long months between the election in November and the inauguration on March 4, 1933, the U.S. economy kept getting worse. (The date of the inauguration was later changed by the 20th Amendment to the Constitution so that every president after Roosevelt was inaugurated on January 20 after a much shorter wait.) The number of unemployed workers and evicted farmers kept growing. In addition, the banking system, the heart of the nation’s economic structure, faltered, and more banks closed.
Banks that had given loans to buy stocks now held worthless paper since the loans could never be repaid. Banks that had given loans to farmers now owned worthless farm land or were blocked from foreclosure by angry farmers. As more banks failed, people began to take their money out of the remaining banks. A “run on a bank,” as a large number of withdrawals all at once was known, could put any bank out of business because no bank simply kept deposits in its vaults but, rather, invested the money. In 1930, 1,352 banks closed; in 1931, 2,294 more went out of business; and in 1932, another 1,453 failed. In November 1932, Nevada’s governor proclaimed a “bank holiday,” temporarily closing all banking before more banks got into trouble. Iowa followed in January, then Michigan, Maryland, Oklahoma, Indiana, Ohio, Arkansas, and Arizona in February. Sixteen more states closed banks at the beginning of March, and finally, on March 4, Illinois and New York—home to the nation’s largest banks in Chicago and New York City—declared a bank holiday. On that day at noon, with most banks closed and most economic activity in the country at a standstill, Franklin Roosevelt was inaugurated to replace Herbert Hoover as president.
The Brain Trust and the First 100 Days
At his inauguration, the new president told the nation that it must not shrink from honestly facing conditions in our country today. And he was blunt about what those conditions were, saying:
Only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment. Yet our distress comes from no failure of substance.... Plenty is at our doorstep, but a generous use of it languishes in the very sight of the supply. Primarily this is because the rulers of the exchange of mankind’s goods have failed, through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence, have admitted their failure, and abdicated.
But in that same address, he also insisted on his firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself-nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.” Given the nation’s situation, many could think of quite a few things to fear, but Roosevelt made it clear that he was ready to act to address the crisis, and that alone gave people optimism—for a time.
New Deal
A term for the programs and legislation developed during Franklin Roosevelt's administration aimed at ending the Great Depression.
Times 629
Chapter 22 Livingj

? I " 'I Area served by TVA electrical power
Tennessee River Valley watershed
I
Principal TVA dams |g TVA power plants MAP 22-1 The Range of the TVA. TheTVA, orTennessee Valley Authority, built dams that controlled flooding and brought electric power to thousands of Americans living in one of the most poverty stricken parts of the nation along the length of the Tennessee River.
The Indian New Deal
The New Deal was a time of extraordinary change for many Americans, including American Indians. Like other New Deal initiatives, the changes began during the Hoover years. In 1928, Lewis Meriam led a study of federal Indian policy. Meriams team conducted the first large-scale examination of the impact of the 1887 Dawes Act (see Chapter 16).
In his report, The Problem of Indian Administration, Miriam was blunt, writing, “The work of the government directed toward the education and advancement of the Indian.. .is largely ineffective,” and, “The provisions for the care of the Indian children in boarding schools are grossly inadequate.” Meriam called for moving the education of Indian children to their home and tribal context, which was done.
Roosevelt appointed social worker John Collier as commissioner of Indian Affairs. Collier came to office determined to right some of the wrongs that had been done, and by June 1934 he had convinced Congress to pass the Wheeler-Howard Act, also known as the Indian Reorganization Act. Two years later, in 1936, Congress extended the same rights to native Alaskans. This law was the beginning of what came to be known as the
Indian New Deal	Indian New Deal. Under the Indian Reorganization Act, the government recognized
A series of policy changes, including the	the legal rights of Indian tribes (not done since 1887), including tribal right to hold
Indian Reorganization Act ofJ 934 that	reservation lands. Tribes adopted constitutions and formed governments. Tribes, not
strengthened Indian tribal government of	the federal government, were given the right to decide on tribal membership-not
the reservations.	an easy issue after generations of relationships between whites and Indians. For most
tribes, the Indian New Deal was a fresh start.
632 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
TABLE 22-1 Major New Deal Laws and Agencies
Agency/Law	Year Launched or Passed	Purpose	What Happened?	II
Emergency Banking Act	1933*	Initial action to save the nation's banking system	Replaced later the same year by	I Glass-Steagall Act
FDIC—Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, created by Glass-Steagall Act	1933*	FDIC—to guarantee bank deposits, restore consumer confidence in banks Glass Steagall Act—to separate commercial and investment banking; banks with guaranteed deposits could not speculate in stock market	FDIC still operating, guaranteeing bank deposits Glass-Steagall separation of commercial and investment banking repealed in 1999
AAA—Agricultural Adjustment Administration	1933*	Subsidize farmers to restrict production and boost farm prices	Declared unconstitutional in 1936; replaced with farm subsidies in 1938 that still continue
Home Owners Loan Corporation and Farm Credit Administration	1933*	Provide home and farm loans to refinance mortgages	Temporary emergency measures
TVA—Tennessee Valley Authority	' 1933*	Build dams to stop flooding and generate electricity	Still operating
FERA—Federal Emergency Relief Administration	i 1933*	:	Provide funds for state and local relief agencies	Temporary emergency measure
NRA—National Recovery Administration	1933*	Protect prices, wages, and employment with codes for business (a major New Deal agency)	Declared unconstitutional in 1935
PWA—Public Works Administration (authorized by the NRA)	1933*	\	Stimulate economy by building schools, hospitals, dams, etc.	Continued until 1943 when replaced by wartime construction
CCC—Civilian Conservation Corps	1933*	Employ young men to plant forests, build roads, etc.	Continued until 1943, employing 2.5 million men, when wartime jobs eliminated unemployment
SEC—Securities and Exchange Commission	1934	Regulate the stock market	Still operating
Indian Reorganization Act	1934	Launch Indian New Deal	Much still in force
FHA—Federal Housing Administration	1934	Provide home loans	Still operating
WPA—Works Progress Administration	1935	Provide large-scale construction jobs building schools, parks, post offices	Continued until 1943 when replaced by wartime construction
Social Security Administration	i 1935	Support retirement pensions through payroll tax	Still operating
National Labor Relations Board created by Wagner Act	1935	Provide new rights for union organizing and free union elections	Partially repealed by Taft Hartley Act in 1947
NYA—National Youth Administration	1935	Provide jobs and support to students (officially part of the WPA)	Closed in 1943; federal work study component still operating
Fair Labor Standards Act	1938	Ensure minimum wage and maximum hours	Still operating with wage raises from time to time
* Indicates a program enacted during the first 100 days of Roosevelt s administration.
African-Americans, the Depression, and FDR's "Black Cabinet"
The Great Depression hit African-Americans especially hard. Many who had moved to
northern cities were still on the bottom of the economic ladder and were often among
the first to lose their jobs. As business failed and the need for goods and services
declined, African-American jobs declined precipitously. In 1934, a government survey
estimated that 17 percent of whites but 38 percent of blacks were out of work.
Most New Deal agencies were designed to help both blacks and whites, but in some
cases, discrimination was built into the policies, and in other cases, policies that should
have been fair were implemented by people who were not. The NRA, which set mini-
mum wages for jobs, set low minimum salaries in laundry services, tobacco production,
Chapter 22 Living in Hard Times 633
Mary McLeod Bethune was a leader in FDR's Black Cabinet and, through her friendship with Eleanor Roosevelt, an influential voice across the administration, but she was also an influential educator and organizer in her own right.
and other fields where there were large numbers of black workers. Agricultural
Adjustment Administration payments often helped landlords but were not passed on, as they should have been, to help tenant farmers or sharecroppers. In the Civilian Conservation Corps, which provided jobs for unemployed young people—originally only males—some 200,000 African-American boys and young men did get jobs and work experience, but the CCC maintained rigidly segregated camps. The federal Home Owners Loan Corporation was designed to give loans to blacks and whites, but local officials of the Federal Housing Authority often decided that blacks were a poor risk and so denied loans to them.
Nevertheless, many African-Americans made significant gains during the Great Depression. Recognizing that AAA payments were being withheld, African-American sharecroppers organized the Southern Tenant Farmers Union to demand payments. African-American voters began to shift political allegiance from the “Party of Lincoln” to the Democratic Party because they were attracted to Roosevelt’s New Deal Policies and especially Eleanor Roosevelt’s active support as she visited black communities, advocated for black civil rights, and courted African-American voters. Blacks began to win elections to state legislatures. In 1928, Chicago’s Oscar DePriest was elected to the U.S. Congress, the first black since Reconstruction. Black votes helped defeat candidates who opposed antilynching bills.
Early in his administration, Roosevelt created what came to be known as the Black Cabinet, a shifting and informal group. Roosevelt’s (white) Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes, former president of the Chicago branch of the NAACP, and Eleanor Roosevelt enlarged the size and power of the Black Cabinet. Robert L. Vann, editor of the Pittsburgh Courier, served as special assistant to the attorney general, and William H. Hastie, dean of the Law School at Howard University, served as a legal
advisor to the Department of the Interior. Robert C. Weaver (who in the 1960s would be the first African-American in the cabinet) advised the Department of the Interior.
Perhaps the most prominent member of the Black Cabinet was Mary McLeod Bethune. Bethune was head of a school for girls in Daytona, Florida, that would become Bethune-Cookman College. During the 1920s, Bethune became president of the National Association of Colored Women, which advocated for a federal antilynching bill and for support for black women in attending training programs and college. Frustrated by what she saw as the conservatism of the NACW, she launched the more aggressive National Council of Negro Women in 1935.
At Eleanor Roosevelt’s urging, Bethune was appointed as the director of the Negro Division of the National Youth Administration (NYA), where she channeled some of the NYA’s considerable resources toward creating jobs for African-American youth. Bethune used her position and her friendship with Eleanor Roosevelt to organize a Federal Council of Negro Affairs to ensure that blacks in and out of the administration spoke with one voice. When Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson called a conference on women and the war effort in 1941, and failed to invite black women, she wrote to him, “We are not humiliated. We are incensed.” Bethune was not going to be ignored.
Black Cabinet
An informal network of high-level African-American officials and advisors to the Roosevelt administration who worked together to influence government policy.
The Dust Bowl and the "Okie" Experience
Unlike the many farmers who faced troubles in the 1920s, wheat farmers of Oklahoma, Kansas, and the Texas panhandle often prospered during that decade because even when the price of wheat fell they could always plow more land and plant more wheat. As the Depression worsened, however, the Plains farmers faced a unique crisis.
Eventually the ever-expanding production of wheat caught up with the farmers. The wheat harvest in the fall of 1931 was the most bountiful in history. Farmers had been planting more land, and it was exceedingly fertile. The result was that far more wheat was produced that fall than could possibly be consumed. Europe, like the United States, was in a depression. Wheat exports and wheat consumption were down. The price paid for wheat fell so low in 1931 that farmers lost money on every
634 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
bushel produced. Many vowed not to plant in 1932, and probably a third of the Great plains farmers faced foreclosures for debt or back taxes.
Then a different disaster struck. Starting late in 1932 and continuing in 1933,1934, and 1935, farms across the Great Plains simply blew away. Year after year, the dust storms continued, but the worst storm came on Sunday April 14, 1935, known to those who lived through it as Black Sunday. The day began sunny and windless. Then in the afternoon, the wind picked up, and what looked like a purple or black wall started blowing in from the northwest. Jeanne Clark remembered that she had been outside playing when she heard a panicked call from her mother to come inside. Before she could get to the house, the storm hit. “It was like I was caught in a whirlpool,” Clark said. “All of a sudden it got completely dark. I couldn’t see a thing.” That one storm took 300,000 tons of soil from the Great Plains and deposited it hundreds of miles away—twice as much soil as had been dug out of the Panama Canal. Clark remembered the terrible coughing that followed. A doctor said she had “dust pneumonia” and might not survive. Clark did survive, but others, mostly children and old people, died from the dust storms. Before the end of the 1930s, more than 250,000 people—two-thirds of the Plains population— simply left what had become known as the “Dust Bowl” (see Map 22-2).
Dust and drought. J931-1939 Dust bowl
t I Drought area
—— Route 66 (migration route to California)
MAP 22-2 The Dust Bowl. Overp,anting and plowing,of^^^XX^^X^’Sihway «orms that destroyed agricultural communities in	Dust Bow| refugees sought a new |jfe jn
from Chicago to Los Angeles, became the route by	Y
California agriculture.
Chapter 22 Living in Hard Times 635
After 1910, scores of white settlers with high hopes had come to the Great Plains and built farms in the “last frontier,” encouraged by the government. Since the land was so dry, the government also doubled the homestead allotment to 320 acres. The weather could be terribly hot in the summer and cold in the winter, but the soil was rich. A few old-timers and ranchers said, “God didn t create this land around here to be plowed up.” But farmers plowed and grew crops on land that had previously grown only grass.
In the 1930s, however, there was a prolonged drought, and the wells had to be dug deeper to find any water. The soil started to dry up, and then the wind, which always blows hard on the Plains, started to carry the soil away. Cattle suffocated from the dust. People rubbed Vaseline in their nostrils to protect them, and the Red Cross gave out respirator masks at school. People stuffed wet towels and sheets into cracks in doors or windows only to see their houses filled with dust anyway.
As the New Deal administration began to grapple with the Dust Bowl crisis, agricultural agents arrived in the region in 1934 offering up to $16 a head for the remaining cattle, which were either shot on the spot or shipped to a slaughterhouse in Amarillo, Texas. The government offered payments averaging $498 for a promise not to raise a wheat crop the following year. The CCC tried to build demonstration projects to reclaim the land. The reclamation projects did not work. The $498 paid off old debts, but hope of a more bountiful year in 1935 or 1936 seemed remote. Farmers and townspeople began departing in 1934, and before long, a region and a way of life—one that was less than a generation old—simply disappeared.
Most people who left the Dust Bowl moved to California. In the midst of a national Depression, they became migrant farm workers—hired hands on the farms of California’s Central Valley where they were given the derogatory name of “Okies,” (on the assumption that they were all from Oklahoma). For many Californians the “Okies” were desperately poor intruders in a state whose own economy was suffering terribly. Photographers working for the Farm Security Administration (FSA) took their pictures; Carey McWilliams, a young California lawyer, wrote Factories in the Fields describing their plight; and one of the country’s best known writers, John Steinbeck, immortalized their experience in The Grapes of Wrath. Tom Joad, the hero of Steinbeck’s novel defined what it meant to be an Okie: “Okie use’ to mean you was from Oklahoma. Now it...means you’re scum. Don’t’ mean nothing itself, it’s the way they say it.” Nevertheless, for the characters in Steinbeck’s novel and for thousands of real-life migrants, it was also a term of pride and of grim determination.
Longtime residents of California’s Central Valley feared the Okies. Mexican and Filipino agricultural workers worried, for good reason, that white Dust Bowl refugees would take their jobs. A preference for those who were native-born led many California farmers to give jobs to whites during the Great Depression, leaving longtime employees without work. Moreover, the California growers, a powerful political bloc, were happy to have more competition for jobs in the fields and to pit ethnic groups against one another other.
Mexican American and Filipino farm workers, too often ignored by traditional unions, had created their own unions. In 1933, before the arrival of most Dust Bowl refugees, 47,500 agricultural workers were involved in 37 different strikes in California’s rich Central Valley. Some 5,000 mostly Mexican American workers were involved in the partially successful El Monte berry strike in June 1933 and a larger cotton strike that fall.
By the late 1930s, up to 10 workers were applying for every job in the California fields, and a field hand who made a dollar per day was doing well. Probably half of those working in the California fields were “Okies” while the other half were longtime workers who were Mexicans or Filipinos. The unions were divided by ideological differences as well as by splits between the newly arrived refugees and those who had been in the fields for a generation.
Despite the efforts of California farm workers to build unions in the field, few strikes were very successful. California agribusiness was strong and got stronger
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
636
during the 1930s. The Associated Farmers of California that was founded in 1934 had resources and power far beyond anything available to the California farm workers.
Whatever one s race, working in the field was terribly hard work. Dust Bowl refugees who had owned their own farms and had viewed the future with optimism, who had bought a piano for their living room and a new Model T Ford for the family, now lived in government camps if they were lucky, and under bridges if they were not, and followed the crops from one farm to another. Most of the Dust Bowl refugees survived on the margins of society until the new industrial jobs created by World War II ended the Depression for them.
The Works Progress Administration and the Artists'New Deal
In April 1935, Congress created the Works Progress Administration (WPA) to institutionalize and expand the New Deal. Roosevelt appointed Harry Hopkins, a former settlement house worker and one of FDR’s closest advisors, to lead it. The WPA’s role was to move people from emergency relief (“the dole,” as the president called it) to temporary, government-supported jobs and to make the government the employer of last resort. Under Hopkins’s leadership, the WPA provided government-funded jobs for 8.5 million Americans at a cost of $11 billion between 1935 and 1942. WPA workers built roads, theaters, public buildings, and in some cases planned communities in every state of the Union as well as planted forests, laid out new parks, and changed the face of the countryside. Providing WPA jobs also provided opportunities for Roosevelt’s political allies—usually Democrats, but in some cases, such as New York City’s liberal Republican Mayor Fiorello La Guardia, also Republicans—to win political favors by handing out the coveted jobs to political supporters.
At the urging of Eleanor Roosevelt, Hopkins included jobs for artists in the WPA. In response to one critic of the artists’ program, Hopkins said, “Hell, they’ve got to eat just like other people.” In 1935 and 1936, WPA artists painted murals in post offices; provided music through symphony orchestras, jazz groups, Appalachian banjo pickers, and Texas fiddlers; staged theater productions of everything from Shakespeare to new cutting-edge works; wrote guidebooks to every part of the United States; and recorded the oral histories of former slaves, among many other projects. Besides ensuring that many artists were able to eat and practice their craft, the WPA art programs left a lasting cultural legacy, though not one without criticism.
Other federal agencies also hired artists. Rexford Tugwell, one of the most influential members of the Brain Trust, charged the Farm Security Administration with creating a “Pictorial Sourcebook of American Agricultural History.” Between 1935 and 1939, a team of photographers, including several who later became famous for their work—Dorothea Lange, Walker Evans, and Ben Shahn—roamed the country creating a picture of often-hidden rural poverty.
Organized Labor, the Committee for Industrial Organization, and the Factory Floor
Many labor union leaders were not sure they trusted Roosevelt and the New Deal in the early years. However, although the primary purpose of the National Industrial Recovery Act of June 1933 was to stabilize prices, at Roosevelt’s insistence, it also included a clause protecting collective bargaining through unions. The National Labor Relations Act of 1935 (the Wagner Act) sponsored by New York Senator Robert Wagner, expanded the rights of union members, outlawing “unfair labor practices as well as giving workers the right to join a union without getting fired, rights to collective bargaining, and the right to strike. For the next decade, unions could be relatively sure that the federal government would not intervene in a strike on the side of management, as it had done repeatedly in the past. The Wagner Act did not create any unions, but it did provide a new context; labor organizers took the next steps on their own.
223
Chapter 22 Living in Ham^ges 637
Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO)
A new labor union that sought to organize industrial workers by industry, such as all automobile workers.
Striking workers at a General Motors factory in Flint, Michigan, sit on car seats in front of unfinished automobiles. The sit-down strike created a new form of labor union organizing.
638 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
In 1935, when the Wagner Act was passed, only about 10 percent of American workers were union members, mostly in the skilled craft unions of the American Federation of Labor (A.F. of L.). Within the A.F. of L. some of its leaders, John L. Lewis of the United Mine Workers of America, Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, and David Dubinsky of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, pushed the A.F. of L. to organize the unorganized. Lewis and his colleagues wanted industrial unions that would organize a union of all the workers in an industry such as steel or automobiles or textiles, as opposed to the craft unions that focused on a single trade—carpenters, plumbers, or electricians. But the leadership of the A.F. of L. would have none of it. They meant to protect their current members.
Lewis, Hillman, and Dubinsky created a Committee for Industrial Organization within the A.F. of L. When other union leaders within the A.F. of L. continued to resist their efforts, the Committee for Industrial Organization became the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), a separate union and a competitor to the A.F. of L.
John L. Lewis, founding president of the CIO, could be tough, arbitrary, arrogant, and self-absorbed. He also was able to speak to workers as no one since Eugene Debs and Mother Jones. Lewis believed that by the 1930s a “mighty surge of human sentiment” was about to change industrial America.
Sometimes the “mighty surge” got ahead of those who were trying to lead it. Across the country, workers, even many who had not yet joined a union, launched a new kind of strike—the sit-down strike. Instead of walking off the job and onto the picket lines, CIO-inspired workers simply stopped work and sat down where they were. In doing so, they guaranteed that they could not be replaced by nonunion workers, and they were hard to attack without harming the machinery they were guarding. They were also much more comfortable inside the plant than outside. It turned out to be a brilliant tactic.
One of the first sit-down strikes took place in Akron, Ohio, at the Firestone Tire Plant on January 29, 1936. After the workers sat down where they were and the noise of the assembly line stopped, one worker said of the silence, “It’s like the end of the world.” The Firestone workers stayed where they were for 3 days and won.
The CIO reported a surge of telephone calls, “We’ve sat down! Send someone over to organize us!” From September 1936, through the following spring, 485,000 workers engaged in sit-down strikes. The CIO grew to 2 million members in 6 months.
For most assembly line workers fortunate enough to have jobs in the 1930s, the primary complaint was not salary. As one Chevrolet worker told a NRA investigator in 1934, “Of course, we make enough to live on while we are working, but we don’t work enough time.” Workers on assembly lines also complained about constant speed-ups on the assembly lines. In an assembly-line industry, the pace of the line ruled everything. At Flint’s Fisher Body plant, a worker said, “I ain’t got no kick on wages, but I just don’t like to be drove.”
On December 30, 1936, workers in two General Motors units in Flint, Michigan, stopped the line and sat down where they were. The Flint Sit-Down Strike had begun. By January 4, 1937, workers were sitting in at GM plants in Cleveland, Ohio; Atlanta, Georgia; Anderson, Indiana; Norwood, Ohio; and Kansas City, Missouri. It was the beginning of a long, cold winter.
On January 11, the GM management turned the heat off even though it was 16 degrees outside. Police blocked a delivery of food. A group of about 30 strikers went to the main gate and broke through a police lock to get to supporters outside. The company called the Flint police, who fired tear gas. Strikers responded by throwing door hinges, bottles, and stones at the police. The United Auto
Workers union (UAW) called it the Battle of the Running Bulls.” The wind blew the tear gas back on the police. The gas and the continuing hail of missiles from the plant infuriated them, and they began shooting at strikers and picketers. Amazingly, no one was killed. The young wife of one striker, Genora Johnson, who was herself on the picket line, remembered, “I did not know fear. I knew only surprise, anguish, and anger.”
Everyone strikers and GM management—wondered about the ability of the strikers to continue. Most of those engaged in the sit-in were not yet union members, and few of them had ever been involved in a strike before, much less a protracted sit-in. But one remembered, It was like war. The guys with me became my buddies.”
Negotiations began in mid-January and on February 11a settlement was reached. General Motors recognized the UAW’s right to represent its members, something the company had sworn never to do. It promised to negotiate in good faith on future contracts and that there would be no punishment of workers because of the sit-down. The union ended the strike. The United Automobile Workers Journal said of the settlement, “The greatest strike in American history has been victoriously concluded.” One striker said it more modestly, “Even if we got not one damn thing out of it other than that, we at least had a right to open our mouths without fear.”
Opponents of the New Deal
Not everyone celebrated the union’s victory over General Motors or other results of the New Deal. In July 1934, the du Pont brothers, Pierre, Irenee, and Lammot, invited a number of business and political leaders, including the 1928 Democratic nominee Al Smith, to New York to discuss “the dangers to investors” in the New Deal. The du Ponts, who also owned a major share of General Motors, had many reasons to dislike the Roosevelt administration. They and their guests created the American Liberty League to oppose the New Deal.
Irenee du Pont said that the family had “followed the President in the belief that he was sincere,” but thought that “the so-called New Deal” was nothing more or less than the socialistic doctrine. Al Smith, once Roosevelt’s mentor, told those at a Liberty League dinner that he would probably “take a walk” (not participate) during the next presidential election and accused Roosevelt of handing the government over to dreamy professors and bleeding-heart social workers. A league publication said that the New Deal stirred up the “dragon teeth of class warfare.” Other members of the American Liberty League included John J. Raskob, a former Democratic Party chair, who had been an executive at General Motors and the DuPont corporation; John W. Davis, the 1924 Democratic presidential nominee; Alfred P. Sloan of General Motors; and Sewell Avery of Montgomery Ward. (Herbert Hoover declined to join, derogato-rily calling the League the “Wall Street model of human liberty.”)
The National Association of Manufacturers also became a tough opponent of the New Deal. The association was created before 1900 to coordinate business opposition to labor unions. With the advent of the New Deal, leaders of the organization sought to “serve the purposes of business salvation,” and by 1937, were spending $1.5 million a year on radio programs, motion pictures, bill boards, direct mail, and speakers, attacking the New Deal.
While conservative critics of the New Deal said that it was driving the country toward socialism, Roosevelt worried much more about other critics; those who thought the New Deal was not socialistic enough. The Communist Party was always unhappy with Roosevelt. Communists dismissed the New Deal as mere bourgeois democracy.” Communists created unemployment councils, led rent strikes, and defended union members and civil rights workers. Although the party was small, it was not without influence in the 1930s.
Many noncommunists also wanted to push the country further than Roosevelt wanted to go. Socialists, who were the heirs of Eugene V. Debs Socialist Party, as well as many Midwestern progressives who had supported Theodore Roosevelt in 1912
American Liberty League
Launched in 1934, the group was one of the largest and most well funded of several organizations opposed to the New Deal, which it considered socialistic.
Chapter 22 Living in Hard Times
and Wisconsin Senator Robert La Follette’s bid for president in 1924, talked of a third-party challenge in 1936.
A 66-year-old Californian, Dr. Francis Townsend, proposed a federal pension of $200 per month to any person over 60 years old who would retire from work, leaving a job open for someone younger. The idea spread like wildfire. A number of candidates were elected to Congress in 1934 with Townsend’s support. In addition, there were some 5,000 Townsend Clubs around the country, and 25 million people signed Townsend petitions to Congress.
While Townsend’s ideas were gaining political traction, the muckraking author Upton Sinclair announced that he would seek the Democratic nomination for governor of California in 1934 based on a pledge to “End Poverty in California (EPIC). Like the Townsend movement, the EPIC campaign took off among voters who were impatient with the New Deal. Sinclair won the nomination, received widespread support—though not from Roosevelt, who saw EPIC as an effort to confiscate private property—and helped shape the national dialogue, even though he lost the election.
More influential than Townsend or Sinclair, the “radio priest” Charles Coughlin inspired some and frightened others in the early 1930s. Coughlin had been appointed pastor of a small Catholic parish in the working class Detroit suburb of Royal Oak in 1926. Catholic auto workers formed the core of his congregation. Coughlin arranged for the local radio station to broadcast his Sunday sermons, and in 1930, their popularity led to a contract with the Columbia Broadcasting System to carry him nationally (and led the anti-Catholic Kian to burn a cross on his lawn). As the Depression worsened, Coughlin’s sermons became more political. He relentlessly attacked Hoover and the nation’s bankers, and he described himself as the voice of “the little people, the average man [who] was suffering.” Given the size of his radio audience, Roosevelt was delighted that Coughlin supported his 1932 campaign.
After the election, the two met at the White House, but Coughlin later turned on the New Deal. He accused FDR of having “out-Hoovered Hoover” and talked of organizing his own political party. His sermons took on an increasingly anti-Semitic and isolationist tone, and some thought he was starting to sound like the new German Chancellor Adolph Hitler.
In Roosevelt’s mind, however, the greatest challenge came from Louisiana’s charismatic Senator Huey P. Long. Long was a product of the pine woods region of Louisiana where poverty, the Baptist church, and political independence flourished. Long’s forbearers had supported the Union cause during the Civil War and Eugene V. Debs during the early 1900s. In 1928, as Al Smith was going down to defeat, Long was elected governor of Louisiana after a campaign attacking big corporations, especially Standard Oil. Long’s grass-roots populism led him to attack the rich and promise opportunity for the poor. “Every man a king, but no one wears a crown,” was his campaign slogan. He raised taxes on oil and gas production, built new highways, schools, and hospitals, provided free textbooks, and grew very popular and very powerful. Some said that Louisiana under Long was a virtual dictatorship. He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1930. In Washington, he showed disdain for Democrats as well as Republicans, called the president “Frank,” much to FDR’s displeasure, and said that all he cared about was “what the boys at the forks of the creek think of me.” Ihere were a lot of boys and girls at the forks of a lot of creeks who thought a lot of Long. FDR considered him a dangerous demagogue.
In 1934, Long launched what he called the Share Our Wealth Society. Long promised a one-time grant of $5,000 per family and a guaranteed income of $2,500 (twice the 1934 national average) as well as educational subsidies for the young and pensions for the elderly (specifically designed to attract Townsend support) all to be paid for by seizing the wealth of the few. When people said his numbers did not add up, that there was not enough wealth to seize even if people wanted to, Long responded that his followers needed to “be prepared for the slurs and snickers of some high ups.” But, he insisted, “Let no one tell you that it is difficult to redistribute the wealth of this land. It is simple.”
640 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
While the Communists and Socialists did not cause Roosevelt to worry, Townsend, Coughlin, and Long did. The president worried about a dictatorship emerging in the United States, just as dictatorships had emerged as a result of the Depression in Italy and Germany. Democratic Chairman James Farley commissioned a poll that showed that a third-party ticket led by Long could lead to Roosevelt’s defeat in 1936 and perhaps even a Long victory, if not in 1936 then by 1940. There was plenty to worry about. “Long plans to be a candidate of the Hitler type for the presidency in 1936,” Roosevelt said. The president reshaped his political agenda to take control of the national dialogue.
The Continuing Depression and the Expanding New Deal 1935-1939
During Roosevelts first 100 days, indeed his first 2 years, the New Deal consisted of a series of experiments, some contradictory, some well thought out, but all designed to stem the worst of the Depression and begin a new course—to keep people from starving, to put them back to work, to get more money into circulation. In 1935 there was a shift in focus; some called it the “Second New Deal.” It was not a radical change, but it did involve greater attention to long-term financial security for more Americans.
Before accepting the job as FDR’s secretary of labor, Frances Perkins had insisted that the president promise to back pensions for the aging and unemployment insurance. In an early meeting, Roosevelt told Perkins, “I will authorize you to try, and if you succeed, that’s fine.” It was all the authorization she needed. Perkins had witnessed the tragic Triangle Shirtwaist Fire in New York in 1911 and had led the investigation that followed and helped craft some of the health and safety legislation that emerged from it. The growth and popularity of the Townsend movement gave Perkins more political clout than she might otherwise have had. If a plan could be devised that was financially viable (unlike the Townsend plan), then 1934 and 1935 was the time to get it passed.
Roosevelt worried about amassing too much power in the federal government. He insisted that the states play the lead role in unemployment insurance though he was willing to have a federal role. But he was adamant, “All the power shouldn’t be in the hands of the federal government. Look—just think what would happen if all the power was concentrated here, and Huey Long became president!” Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau was determined that any plan be fiscally viable. But many in the administration thought Townsend had a point: the country did need to encourage older Americans to retire and leave their jobs to younger people. And Perkins was determined to get a bill through Congress.
Frances Perkins, the secretary of labor and its prime architect, stood behind him.
Social Security Act
Legislation that established a system of federal old-age pensions in effect to the present day.
On January 17,1935, FDR announced plans for a Social Security program that would protect some 26 million citizens with “security against the hazards and vicissitudes of life,” The proposed bill included a federal tax on employees and employers to fund the retirement system, a federal tax to help support a state-administered unemployment insurance system, and emergency grants to fund the immediate relief of the indigent elderly, Aid to Dependent Children, and modest support for public health. Since the Constitution clearly gave the government the right to tax, there was no room for a constitutional challenge to the legislation. Congress passed the Social Security Act 7 months later on August 14, 1935. The proposed Social Security Act included a federal tax on employees and employers to fund the retirement system. In January 1940, the fifth anniversary of Roosevelt’s speech about the program, Ida M. Fuller, a 76-year-old woman living in Vermont, received the first Social Security check.
As Roosevelt prepared for the reelection battle of 1936, he also toughened his rhetoric. In his 1933 inaugural address, FDR had criticized the rulers of the exchange of mankind’s goods” for having “failed, through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence.” In 1936, however, his speeches took on a harsher tone. He spoke of his “old enemies,” the bankers and profiteers, and condemned their “greed” and “autocracy.” He said of business leaders, “They are unanimous in their hate for me-and I welcome their hatred.”
American Voices
Frances Perkins, “The Roots of Social Security,” Reflecting on 1935
Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins took the lead in creating the
Social Security retirement system, still in operation today. Years later, she looked back on the work she did.
[T]he real roots of the Social Security Act were in the Great Depression of 1929. Nothing else would have bumped the American people into a social security system except something so shocking, so terrifying, as that Depression....
But everything was down. Nobody could get a job. The grocer didn't employ the young boys to deliver goods any more. He couldn't afford to. The grocer himself finally went bankrupt and closed up. He had given too much credit. I mean the people who were out of work had credit at the grocery store at first and they could eat; but they couldn't pay their bills, and finally, the grocer couldn't pay his bills; and eventually somebody came and sold him out. It went on like that all the time....
In the spring of 1932, Franklin Roosevelt had gone out to Utah to the Conference of Governors....He made a speech which was full of pleasant hyperbole of one sort or another—flattery to various Governors—but at one point he began to discuss the great problems now facing this country, and he spoke about unemployment. Then he said, "I am for unemployment insurance but not for the dole."
Until we heard those words come over the wires, I wasn't sure he was going to say he was for unemployment insurance. I was afraid he was going to say he was against the dole, and nothing else....It created a great interest and a great enthusiasm among the voters, which he was not slow to catch on to. He had that kind of a mind, you know; he could feel the public pulse, and he cared about the public pulse....
At any rate, we worked all summer....It was a terribly hot summer and everybody worked hard all the time and finally we actually did bring forth a report.. .that recommended unemployment insurance and old-age insurance but omitted health insurance just because the experts couldn't get through with health insurance in time to make a report on it....
This, then, was the genesis of the whole bill. We did a great deal of educating by one kind of propaganda or other, chiefly hearings. Senator Wagner put it up—a bill which he called a model bill—and held public hearings in the Senate, which attracted a great deal of attention from the Senators. We had a number of senatorial committees which we asked to look into this or that. We got advice. All these actions were for the purpose, not so much of advice as of propaganda—that is, of education of the public....The result was a bill that finally was presented to Congress and, as you know, was debated very briefly... .And finally, we did get the basic bill passed.
Source: Frances Perkins, "The Roots of Social Security," speech delivered at Social Security Administration Headquarters, Baltimore, Maryland, October 23,1962, downloaded from www.ssa.gov/history/perkins5.html, January 9,2013
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
As Perkins described it, what role did Roosevelt play in the development and passage of Social Security? What other groups and individuals were important in the process?
2.	Constructing an Argument
Do you agree with Perkins that without the Great Depression
Social Security would never have been enacted? Why or why not?
642 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Roosevelt attacked business leaders every chance he got during 1935 and 1936, but he did not actually do very much to hurt them. Nevertheless, his rhetoric stole the thunder from Coughlin s and Long s; his legislation, especially Social Security, undermined Townsend’s organization; and his support for the Wagner Act created great loyalty among labor unions. As a result, Roosevelt amassed great political capital going into the 1936 presidential election.
Huey Long was assassinated in September 1935. After his death, his Share Our Wealth clubs became the Union Party, which nominated William Lemke, a congressman from North Dakota, for president. The Republicans nominated the liberal Kansas Governor Alf Landon. In spite of polls, including one by the Literary Digest that predicted a Landon win, Roosevelt won a stunning electoral victory in November 1936. He carried 46 of the nation’s 48 states and a huge plurality of the popular vote.
As he began his second term in January 1937, the president seemed to turn the agenda back to fighting the ongoing Depression. In his inaugural address he said, “I see one-third of a nation, ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished.” It was a call to action but also an admission that in 4 years the New Deal had not accomplished all that it hoped for.
In spite of his extraordinary election victory and the high hopes for more permanent reform it engendered, Roosevelt accomplished far less in his second term than in the first. The sense of national crisis was not as great in 1937, and Roosevelt’s own missteps got in the way.
One of FDR’s greatest frustrations was the fact that a conservative U.S. Supreme Court kept undermining his efforts. Late in his first term, the court declared the NRA and then the AAA unconstitutional, as well as state minimum wage laws. Court challenges to Social Security and the Wagner Act were working their way through the lower courts. He was not sure what would come next. In early February 1937 after his reelection, Roosevelt went to Congress with a proposal that would allow him to appoint one additional Supreme Court Justice for every member who was over the age of 70—which in 1937 would mean six new justices—and similar numbers in the lower courts. The Constitution never mentions a number of justices for the court, and the number had fluctuated between five and ten. FDR’s proposal was completely constitutional but politically very unwise. FDR claimed that the goal was to speed judicial review and reduce the workload of the justices. Everyone knew that, in fact, there was only one goal: to stop the court from overturning the New Deal.
To many in Congress, not only conservatives, the court-packing bill was a step toward dictatorship. For some southern senators, it would open up the way to civil rights legislation, which they always feared might someday emerge from the White House. Montana Senator Burton Wheeler, an old progressive who usually sided with the president, led the assault, claiming that the bill “cut down those guarantees of liberty written by the blood of your forefathers.” The legislation was defeated by the friends of the New Deal before its enemies got a chance to join in the debate.
Ironically, while Congress defeated Roosevelt’s plan to expand—or pack the Supreme Court, the justices, perhaps reading the 1936 election returns, shifted ground. Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes and Associate Justice Owen Roberts, who had both voted against the New Deal, changed their minds, first on a minimum wage law and then on the all-important Wagner Labor Relations Act, which the court found to be constitutional. The changes in the Hughes and Robert votes were dubbed “the switch in time that saved nine.” After 1937, although no new justices were added, the court stopped declaring New Deal legislation unconstitutional.
Nevertheless, with the defeat of Roosevelt s court plan, the momentum behind the New Deal slowly came to a stop. Divisions in Congress engendered by the court plan never healed. Unemployment actually rose in 1937 and 1938 in the “Depression within a Depression,” which most likely occurred due to Roosevelt’s effort to balance the federal budget by cutting back on the federal spending that was keeping the economy moving. Congress did pass a bill to resurrect parts of the old AAA now that the court seemed more open to it. A Fair Labor Standards Act that
Chapter 22 Living in Har
Eleanor Roosevelt could travel many places where her husband could not go. Her visits to migrant camps, African-American sharecroppers, or in this case a coal mine, highlighted the needs of many people and gave many faith in her husband's administration.
prohibited child labor and set an hourly minimum wage and a 40-hour work week also passed. However, Congress defeated a plan to expand the Tennessee Valley Authority to other regions of the country and a reorganization plan for the executive branch of the government that FDR wanted. When the president signed the Fair Labor Standards Act in June 1938, he was heard to say, “That’s that.” The New Deal, it seemed, had come to an end even if the Depression that launched it would run on for another year or more.
The New Deal did not end the Great Depression. The economy rebounded only as the United States prepared for World War II and government spending in preparation for war far outpaced anything that had been spent to “prime the pump” during the 1930s. Nevertheless, the New Deal changed the country. The Glass-Steagall Act and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation stabilized the nation’s banking system, and the CCC and other agencies put people to work who desperately wanted— needed—jobs. Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt’s optimism gave people hope, and the president’s commitment helped keep democratic institutions alive at a time when they were under assault not only in Europe and Asia but also in the United States. The federal government since has never shrunk to its pre-New Deal size when the Post Office was the largest government agency. Social Security and federal regulatory agencies play a continuing role in the economy and in people’s lives. Including women and African-Americans in more than token positions within any administration is now the norm. The New Deal also inspired a new conservative movement and philosophy as opponents of the New Deal, especially business leaders, began to attack the new government intervention in the economy that the New Deal launched. While historians will long debate the value and the impact of the New Deal, all agree that the United States was a very different place in 1939 than it had been in 1929.
22,2
Quick Review Was the New Deal the best response to the Great Depression in the 1930s? What other paths might the country have followed?
644 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
thinking historically
Critics of the New Deal
While Franklin Roosevelt was a very popular president, the only one in history elected to the office four times and always by large margins, at no time was his administration without opposition, especially as he faced the 1936 election. Some opponents thought Roosevelt was not moving nearly far or fast enough to use the opportunity presented by the Great Depression to restructure the American economy; others thought he was moving far too quickly and too radically.
Among those who wanted FDR to do more, Louisiana Senator
Huey Long told a 1935 audience that he had "begged and pleaded and did everything else under the sun [to] try to get Mr. Roosevelt to keep his word that he gave us." But Long said he had concluded that there was no reason left to trust Roosevelt. "[H]e has promised and promised, smiled and bowed....There is no use to wait three more years. It is not Roosevelt or ruin, it is Roosevelt's ruin." In another speech, Long was especially clear on the differences, asking Iowa farmers, "Do you believe in the redistribution of wealth?" and basking in their cheers.
In contrast, the New York Times for August 23, 1934, carried a different story. With a headline that read, "League is Formed to Scan New Deal,'Protect Rights,"'the newspaper reported,
"A group of prominent Democrats joined a few Republicans today to incorporate the American Liberty League, intended, according to its incorporators, to combat radicalism, preserve property rights, uphold and preserve the Constitution." For Roosevelt's old mentor Al Smith, the New Deal was becoming a danger to American liberty.
Source: New York Times, August 22,1934, January 10,1935.
Thinking Critically
1.	Constructing an Argument
In your opinion, which set of critics had the stronger argument, those on the left who felt the New Deal was too timid or those on the right who saw the New Deal as a threat to individual liberty and the Constitution? Why?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Given the vehemence with which Roosevelt was attacked from both ends of the political spectrum, what might explain Roosevelt's substantial and enduring popularity over the course of his four terms in office?
22.3
■IY1

22.3
THE DEEP ROOTS OF WAR—THE UNITED STATES, EUROPE,
AND ASIA_____________________________
Analyze the international impact of the Depression, German and Japanese military expansion, and the initial U.S. response.
While the United States emerged from World War I relatively unscathed, much of Europe was devastated, and the Treaty of Versailles caused significant lingering pain and anger, most of all among the defeated Germans. When a worldwide Depression came, suffering, fear, and resentment all planted the seeds of another far greater conflict.
In Europe, some of the earliest signs of the postwar ill will appeared in Italy. In 1922, the leader of the ultranationalist Italian Fascist Party, Benito Mussolini, became prime minister. “Il Duce” (the leader), as he called himself, ruled Italy with an iron fist for more than 20 years. Mussolini’s dream was to restore Italy s ancient glory by building prosperity and reestablishing the ancient Roman Empire, especially in North Africa, starting with Ethiopia.
For Germany, the 1920s were a terrible decade. The German Weimar Republic governed a defeated country. Hyperinflation between 1921 and 1924 made German currency virtually worthless. Shifting government coalitions were not able to create stability, especially in the face of the country’s need to pay some $33 billion in repara-tions—payments that Britain and France used to pay their own $10 billion debt to the United States. In the late 1920s, as the worldwide depression worsened, the German economy collapsed under the load of debt payments and inflation. Banks closed in Germany and Austria. President Herbert Hoover described the German bank crisis of
1931 as “a gigantic explosion which shook the foundations of the world s economic, political, and social structure.” Anger at the economic and political failure in Germany fueled old hatreds and brought a new political party to power in Germany.
Adolph Hitler’s Nazi (or National Socialist) Party grew from a group of street thugs, known as Brown Shirts, in the 1920s, to a formidable group leading to Hitler’s election in January 1933 as German Chancellor, with 44 percent of the vote, just before Roosevelt became president. Hitler promised that a greatly expanded German nation would provide Lebensraum (living space) for people of German nationality by pushing other peoples, Slavs and Jews, out of the way to make room for the “master race.”
A month after coming to office, on February 271933, the Nazi Party issued a decree ending free speech and assembly in Germany. They arrested Communist deputies in the German Parliament, giving themselves a solid majority there. Hitler took the title der Fuhrer, the leader. Later that year, just as the United States was implementing the prolabor New Deal, the Nazi government outlawed trade unions and other political parties. They authorized a new police force, the Geheime Staatspolizei or Gestapo, to enforce Nazi authority. In 1935, as the U.S. Congress was passing the Social Security Act and the Wagner Act, the Nazi Parliament passed the Nuremberg Decrees, which took away the citizenship of German Jews, excluded Jews from most professions and the military, and made the marriage of a Jew and non-Jew illegal. In November 1938, in a well-orchestrated attack across Germany known as Kristallnacht (or crystal night for all the broken glass), crowds attacked Jewish stores, homes, and synagogues while the government arrested some 20,000 Jews. The Nazi government then ordered an “atonement fine” on Jews to pay for the cost of Kristallnacht, closed Jewish stores, and a short time later, confiscated all Jewish property. Before long, Germany’s Jews, and then those in Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and other territories under German control, were being forced to wear yellow stars to identify them. They were packed into tightly controlled urban ghettos, and within 2 years, the first of them were being transported to slave labor and death camps.
Kristallnacht, November 9,1938, was a Nazi Party-inspired attack on Jewish businesses and synagogues across Germany. It was the beginning of worse to come for Jews in Nazi-controlled countries.
646 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
While the German government was attacking its Jewish citizens, Hitler also renounced the clause in the Treaty of Versailles calling for German disarmament and began to build a new army. A year later, in March 1936, Hitler’s army marched into the German Rhineland, which in the terms of the Treaty of Versailles was supposed to be kept free of troops. Two years later, in March 1938, Hitler announced that the independent country of Austria was to be known as the German province of Ostmark, and German troops marched into Austria. On March 14,1938, Hitler rode in triumph through Vienna, welcomed as a hero by many.
Hitler did not stop there. Since the Sudeten region of Czechoslovakia had a large German population (though still a minority), Hitler claimed that they had the right under the Treaty of Versailles which he otherwise ignored—to self-determination and should be incorporated into Germany. After a summer of negotiations and with British agreement, Hitler annexed the Sudeten region. The following spring, in March 1939, Hitler sent the German army into the rest of Czechoslovakia and made a triumphant journey to Prague.
As Nazi power grew in Germany and fascism continued its hold on Italy, the two countries formalized their alliance with the Rome-Berlin Axis treaty of November 1936. A few months earlier, in July 1936, another Fascist, Spanish General Francisco Franco, commander of the Spanish Army garrison in Morocco, led an attack on the left-leaning and democratically elected Republican government of Spain. Spain was engulfed in a bloody civil war. The governments of Germany and Italy sent planes and troops to aid Franco. The communist government of Russia and western governments sent modest aid to the Republicans. But by early 1939, the Fascists had won. Spain joined Italy and Germany, forming a powerful fascist bloc.
While Fascists were consolidating their power in central Europe, militarists in Japan were also growing in power. Japanese militarism had a strong anti-American strain as various American policies—from the exclusion of Japanese children from San Francisco schools in 1906 to the exclusion of all Japanese immigrants as a result of the 1924 immigration law—sparked continuing anger even as people in the United States forgot those incidents.
In the 1910s and 1920s, as Japanese power grew, Japan declared a goal of “Asia for Asians,” which meant Japanese domination of the whole of the western rim of the Pacific Ocean to replace Britain, France, and the United States as dominant powers. Many Asians resented U.S. control of the Philippine Islands, British involvement in China and Burma, Dutch control of the oil-rich East Indies, and French control of Indochina (modern Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia). Except in China, where Japanese advances were deeply resented, the Japanese conquests were often welcomed in the rest of Asia.
By the 1930s, Japan faced the same worldwide depression conditions as other industrialized countries. Japan saw its economic salvation in expansion. The island nation could not provide enough food for its people and lacked key natural resources such as iron and oil. If the Europeans could have Asian colonies, its leaders asked, why not Japan? In September 1932, Japan used an explosion at a Japanese-owned railway in China as an excuse to send troops into China, and they installed a puppet government in the Chinese province of Manchuria. Then in July 1937, Japanese troops captured Shanghai, the largest city in China, and the Chinese capital of Nanking. The Rape of Nanking, as the Japanese attack was called, was a brutal assault. As many as 300,000 Chinese were killed as the Japanese army raped, beheaded, machine-gunned, and bayoneted civilians. The Chinese government led by Chiang Kai-shek retreated and set up a new capital in the inland city of Chungking. Japan renamed the expanded territory in Manchuria as the Japanese province of Manchukuo. A half a million Japanese moved into the territory to farm and govern the subjected Chinese population. At the same time, Chiang’s Kuomintang Party (the Nationalists) was locked in a bitter civil war with the Chinese Community Party led by Mao Zedong.
In the face of so much worldwide violence and aggression, the governments of Great Britain, France, and the United States did virtually nothing while the League of Nations proved to be a meaningless barrier to aggression. The government of France
l........
Mothers with baby carriages march for peace outside the Woolworth building in New York City, 1939.
isolationism
A belief that the United States should keep clear of nearly all involvement with the rest of the world, stay neutral and out of any foreign wars.
ordered the construction of the supposedly impregnable Maginot Line (named for war minister Andre Maginot) along the border with Germany but did little more. When Hitler’s troops, in violation of the Versailles Treaty, marched into the Rhineland in 1936, Hitler wrote privately that, ‘Tf the French had then marched into the Rhineland, we would have had to withdraw with our tails between our legs.” But France did not act.
The desire for peace was equally strong in Britain, driven by still-recent memories of the bloodbath of World War I. If 420,000 British soldiers could die at the single and inconclusive Battle of the Somme in 1916, the next generation was determined to avoid war. In 1933, students at Oxford University voted, “This house will in no circumstance fight for its King and its Country.” In 1935, several thousand young people in Britain joined the Peace Pledge Union, opposing any British military planning. When Mussolini invaded Ethiopia in 1935, Britain, which then controlled the Suez Canal, could have cut off the Italian troops by closing the canal, but did not do so. In spite of pleas from Ethiopia, the League of Nations did nothing.
As late as September 1938, at a conference in Munich, Germany, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain agreed to allow Hitler’s claim to the Sudetenland in exchange for a promise of peace. Chamberlain was greeted with large crowds in London when he returned promising “peace in our time.” In the British Parliament, however, Chamberlain was criticized by Winston Churchill who called the Munich agreement “a total and unmitigated defeat.” However, in 1938, Chamberlain, not Churchill, set British policy.
As France and Britain did nothing to stop the Fascists, most people in the United
States were even more determined to keep their distance from any conflict. During the 1920s and 1930s, a significant majority of Americans wanted nothing to do with Europe’s or Asia’s problems. In 1935, George Earle, the governor of Pennsylvania, said, “If the world is to become a wilderness of waste, hatred, and bitterness, let us all the more earnestly protect and preserve our own oasis of liberty.” Minnesota Senator Thomas Schall said more succinctly, “To hell with Europe and the rest of those nations!” While isolationism was strongest in the Midwest, many people everywhere agreed. In April 1935, 50,000 World War I veterans marched for peace and laid wreaths on the graves of three members of Congress who had voted against U.S. entry into World War
I.
Days later, 175,000 college students staged a strike for peace. There were many reasons for the isolationism that was rampant in the United States in the 1930s. Most Americans had concluded that the many thousand American soldiers killed in the war had died for no reason. Wilson’s dream of a generation of peace sustained by the League of Nations was clearly a failure, and Europeans were once again at each other’s throats. Writers like John Dos Passos, Ernest Hemingway, and e.e. cummings all wrote novels about the meaninglessness of the First World War, and as Dos Passos said, “Rejection of Europe is what America is all about.” In the mid-1950s, a Senate Special Committee known as the Nye Committee, chaired by North Dakota’s Gerald Nye, concluded that big business had led the United States into the World War. In 1935, when President Roosevelt sought U.S. entry to the World Court, the Senate rejected the plan. Americans simply wanted nothing to do with the troubles of other nations.
In Congress, the isolationist and peace sentiment led to the passage of a number of neutrality laws designed to keep the United States out of war. A 1935 law required an embargo of arms to all belligerents in any war while (in a direct slap at Woodrow Wilson’s policies) declaring that any American who traveled on a belligerent ship did so at his or her own risk. In 1936, Congress added a proviso that prohibited loans or credit to any nation at war, and in 1937, Congress explicitly extended the arms embargo to Spain.
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
648
Not every American shared the isolationist sentiments of the majority. In 1936 and 1937, several thousand young Americans, mostly from various left-leaning movements, volunteered to fight in Spain on the side of the Republican government. Volunteers named themselves the Abraham Lincoln Brigade and joined an ill-trained and ill-equipped but courageous force that fought against the Fascists. In one battle near Madrid, 120 Americans died and another 175 were wounded. By the beginning of 1939, when the last Republican units were defeated, President Roosevelt himself concluded that neutrality in Spain had been a “grave mistake...as events will very likely prove.”
While the Abraham Lincoln Brigade fought and President Roosevelt began to believe that the United States would eventually have to fight Fascism in Europe, most people in the country and the Congress continued to believe that they could stay out of all entanglements. When Congress passed the 1937 Neutrality Act, they toughened the prohibition on selling arms to any side and made it illegal for Americans to travel on a belligerent ship. The law also declared that nonmilitary material—food, clothing, and so on—could be sold to a nation at war only on a “cash and carry” basis, insisting that there be no loans to belligerents and that all goods bought in the United States had to be taken out of the country in non-U.S. ships.
The neutrality legislation attempted to keep the United States out of a European war, but violence in Asia was growing. When Japan had attacked Manchuria in 1931, President Hoover’s Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson proclaimed the “Stimson Doctrine”: that the United States would never officially recognize the new regime in Manchukuo or any other arrangement imposed on China by force. The unstated part of the doctrine was that the United States also would not do anything much to enforce its policy. American public opinion was solidly on the side of China. The novelist Pearl Buck, author of The Good Earth published in 1931, and Henry Luce, the owner of the Time-Life publications, were both children of missionaries to China and between them did a lot to build public sympathy for China. In the fall of 1937, a Gallup poll showed that 59 percent of Americans favored China compared to 1 percent who favored Japan in the quest for control of Manchuria. But almost no one wanted to do more than offer sympathy to the Chinese.
In December 1937, Japanese pilots sank the U.S. gunboat Panay in Nanking, China. While Americans were angry, they were not angry enough to challenge Japan. After the Panay was sunk, Texas Congressman Maury Maverick said, “We should learn that it is about time for us to mind our own business,” and a poll showed that most Americans agreed with him. While Americans wanted to stay out of war, American scrap iron and American oil continued to be shipped to Japan, strengthening that country’s military. Since there was no formal war between Japan and China, the Neutrality Act did not apply, and most of the battles in Manchuria were fueled with American petroleum and bombs made of American metal. Indeed, through the late 1930s and into 1940 and 1941, Roosevelt and his cabinet feared not only American isolationists but also the wrath of Japan. If they were to cut off oil shipments they did eventually cut metal shipments—they worried that Japan would quickly attack the Dutch colonies in Asia that were the only other potential source of oil for Japan. To keep the peace, the United States kept the oil flowing.
In the face of the Nazi attacks in Germany and then Austria and Czechoslovakia, many Jews tried to leave Europe. But leaving was not easy, and the strict quotas of the 1924 legislation made immigration to the United States very difficult. In the 1930s, the American Jewish Congress protested loudly against both the Nazi attacks and American immigration policy. The group urged boycotts of German goods and staged a mock trial of Hitler. Roosevelt felt blocked by the immigration laws though he did combine the German and Austrian quotas, allowing some additional Jewish immigration in 1936 and 1937. Britain also allowed modest immigration but resolutely opposed further expansion of the Jewish population of Palestine, then governed by Britain under a League of Nations mandate. Nazi laws limited the amount
Famed aviator Charles Lindbergh was a prominent vocal supporter of American isolationism.
of money a departing Jew could take to about $4, an amount that made a potential immigrant a pauper and therefore ineligible for admission to the United States.
After Kristallnacht, the November 1938 attack on Jews, New York Senator Robert Wagner and House members Edith Nourse Rogers of Massachusetts and Emmanuel Celler of New York proposed legislation that would create an expanded quota for racial and religious refugees. However, as with China, most Americans offered sympathy but little more, and Congress followed public opinion, voting the proposal down. A 1939 poll showed that 85 percent of Protestants, 84 percent of Catholics, and even 25.8 percent of Jews opposed opening the United States to Jewish refugees from Europe.
As the Nazi attacks on Jews escalated, European Jews became desperate to leave. In May 1939, the German ship St. Louis arrived in Havana with 930 Jewish refugees. The Cuban government refused temporary visas. The captain of the St. Louis then sailed up the U.S. coast, well within sight of Miami and other American cities, while negotiators tried
desperately to get the U.S. State Department to allow the refugees to land. But the State Department would not agree and a Coast Guard cutter was ordered to intercept any St. Louis passengers who tried to go ashore. Finally in June, the St. Louis returned to Europe. Before the war ended, perhaps a quarter or more of the passengers had died in concentration camps. Most Americans were sympathetic to the plight of Jews, but anti-Semitism was also strong in America.
Charles Lindbergh, the aviation hero of the 1920s, became an avid opponent of any revision of the neutrality laws or any support for Jewish refugees. Lindbergh became a popular speaker at rallies of the America First Committee that had been organized in the fall of1940 to keep the United States out of war in Europe. Father Charles Coughlin, long an opponent of the New Deal, began calling it the “Jew-Deal.” For Lindbergh, Coughlin, and a significant American following, Nazism was appealing. Others, probably the majority of the supporters of the America First Committee, simply did not want any part of a war that the United States could avoid. Nevertheless, not only isolationism and ignorance but also old hatreds kept the United States from providing the support for Europe’s Jews that they so badly needed.
While Americans tried to ignore developments in Europe and Asia in the late 1930s, Hitler was on the move. He understood that the faster he acted the greater his chances of success. Once Hitler invaded the rest of Czechoslovakia, Prime Minister Chamberlin, who had agreed to an earlier compromise, announced that Britain was committed to the defense of Poland and that if Hitler’s forces attacked that country, his forces would be met with armed resistance.
In April 1939, Mussolini invaded Albania. Hitler made feints toward Poland. Then in August, Hitler stunned the world by signing a nonaggression pact with Joseph Stalin, the dictator of the Soviet Union (as communist Russia was known). The erstwhile enemies—Germany and the Soviet Union with radically different economic systems and ideologies—now agreed to the partition of Poland. Everyone knew what was coming next. In the State Department, one official said that the feeling in the world was like “sitting in a house where somebody is dying upstairs.” Very early in the morning on September 1, 1939, President Roosevelt received a call, “Mr. President,” the U.S. Ambassador in France said, “several German divisions are deep in Polish territory.... There are reports of bombers over the city of Warsaw.” The President replied, “It has come at last. God help us all!”
Britain and France followed through on their promise to declare war. World War II had begun in Europe. On September 3, Roosevelt gave a radio fireside chat in which he said that the United States would remain neutral, but “[e]ven a neutral cannot be asked to close his mind or close his conscience.” The country’s mind was certainly not neutral. Eighty-four percent of Americans supported Britain and France, only two
650 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
percent Germany. But a very large majority also wanted to stay out of the war no matter how much sympathy they might have for one side. After September 1939, more Americans, led by the president, were starting to have grave doubts that staying out of the battle was going to be possible.
Quick Review Considering how the United States was drawn into World War I, why might so many Americans have favored isolationism in the years leading up to World War II?
CONCLUSION
The stock market crash of 1929 was a dramatic and symbolic end to the prosperity of the 1920s, but it was not the first sign that something was very wrong with the U.S. economy. Throughout the 1920s, stock prices had risen dramatically, and by the end of 1928, the economy was showing signs of a speculative boom. Experts began to warn that a crash was inevitable, but American investors largely ignored these warnings. Finally, in October 1929, the bottom fell out of the market. Stock prices crashed and continued to crash for the next 3 years. The Great Depression was in full force.
President Herbert Hoover’s response to the nation’s economic woes moved in the right direction, but it was too cautious and failed to alleviate the crisis or restore confidence among Americans. In 1932, he was defeated for reelection by Franklin Roosevelt, who, once in office, took swiff action to stabilize the nation’s economy and its banking system, extend relief to the impoverished, and create jobs for the unemployed. Roosevelt, with the backing of the Democrats in Congress, passed nine separate pieces of legislation in his first 100 days as president. Dubbed the “New Deal,” his agenda and policies provided important help for some Americans but did little for others.
The New Deal did not end the Depression, but it did provide much needed social welfare, create jobs, shore up the banking system, improve working conditions, and install protective barriers against future economic downturns. Still, the New Deal was not supported by everyone, and Roosevelt faced powerful opponents on the right (who believed that the New Deal was socialism) and on the left (who believed that the New Deal was not progressive enough). Despite such opposition, Roosevelt was popular and was reelected in a landslide in 1936.
By the end of the 1930s, the violence in Europe and Asia was demanding more and more attention. Fascists Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini had seized power in Germany and in Italy and had begun to threaten other states on the European continent. Similarly, Japan had begun a campaign of imperialist expansion in Asia. Most of this behavior initially went unchecked. Not until 1939, when Germany invaded Poland, did Britain and France declare war. Americans disagreed about how to respond to this aggression. At the end of the decade, U.S. involvement in another major European conflict seemed inevitable to some; however, others—probably a majority—wanted to stay out of Europe’s and Asia’s problems despite any sympathy they may have felt for the people in those situations.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did the Great Depression affect the United States both in the 1930s and for the future? What were the three most significant effects? Why?
Chapter 22 Living in H,
,51
Chapter 22 Chapter Review
22.1
THE COMING OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION________________________
Explain the coming of the Great Depression and the initial response to it.
Review Questions
1.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the stock market crash of 1929 with other factors that led to the Great Depression in the United States and worldwide. What similarities and differences do you note?
2.	Contextualization
Why did Herbert Hoover find it so difficult to craft an adequate response to the Great Depression?
THE NEW DEAL
_____________________________________________ Explain the goals and results of the New Deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse Americans.
Review Questions
3.	Contextualization
Why was it so important that Roosevelt stabilize the banking system as quickly as possible?
4.	Historical Interpretation
What factors contributed to the growth of organized labor in the 1930s?
22.2
5.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the arguments made by Roosevelt’s critics on the left and the right. Why did Roosevelt worry much more about his critics on the left than his critics on the right?
6.	Construct an Argument
In your opinion what were the most important accomplishments of the New Deal? What were its greatest failures?
THE DEEP ROOTS OF WAR—THE UNITED STATES, EUROPE, AND ASIA
_________________________________________ Analyze the international impact of the Depression, German and Japanese military expansion, and the initial U.S. response.
Review Questions
7.	Historical Interpretation
What connection can you make between economic events and the rise of Fascist parties to power in Germany, Italy, and Japan?
8.	Contextualization
Why were so many Americans committed to isolationism?
223
652 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
1939-1945
World War II started out with disaster for the United States after Japan attacked the U.S. Navy base at Pearl Harbor, sinking much of the Pacific fleet. It would be a long time before the tide turned.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of many aspects of World War II—military tactics, mobilization of U.S. society and the U.S. economy, and the war's impact on diverse American lives.
On the morning of December 7, 1941, 350 Japanese airplanes attacked the sleeping port of Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, where much of the Pacific fleet was anchored and where planes were lined up in close formation (to protect them against sabotage on the ground). In a few short hours, 2,500 soldiers and sailors were killed, 150 U.S. airplanes destroyed, and five battleships as well as many others vessels were sunk. It was a devastating loss.
The next day, Franklin Roosevelt addressed Congress, speaking of the attack as “a date which will live in infamy.” He asked for, and was given, a declaration of war against Japan. Hitler and Mussolini then declared war on the United States. The long wait was over. With the direct attack on the United States at Pearl Harbor, most isolationists and antiwar voices rallied to the president and the war effort. Every citizen would be touched by the war whether by serving in the military, working in war-related industries, or using ration stamps to buy food. It had been a long wait during the 2 years in which Roosevelt increased support for Britain, negotiated fitfully with Japan, and inched toward war. This chapter traces the story of preparation between 1939 and 1941 and the nation’s full-scale involvement in World War II from December 1941 to the war’s end in August 1945.
PREPAREDNESS AND ISOLATION,
1939-1941 Explain support for and opposition to the growing U.S. support for Britain and growing tensions with Japan.
MASS MOBILIZATION IN A SOCIETY AT WAR
Analyze the war's impact on widely diverse groups of Americans who fought, supported the war effort at home, or otherwise lived through the war years.
INDUSTRIAL STRENGTH, INDUSTRIAL PROSPERITY
Analyze U.S. industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on American society.
WINNING A WORLD WAR—NORTH AFRI< EUROPE, ASIA, THE PACIFIC,
1943-194. Explain the course of the war leading to victory in^
Europe and then the Pacific.
