Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique, published in 1963, played an equally central role in the development of the new women’s movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s (see Chapter 27). The Feminine Mystique named what Friedan called the “problem that has no namethe “comfortable concentration camp where white middle-class suburban women lived. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, a generation of women found multiple ways to break out of this and other concentration camps.
Each of these books sold thousands, sometimes hundreds of thousands of copies. They were read by college students and people of every age bracket, and were discussed on the radio and television, in newspaper editorials, in sermons in religious communities, and around family dinner tables, bringing their ideas to many who never read them. Each book reflected changes that were already underway and, at the same time, each speeded change.
Significant Dates
26.1
1960	Kennedy defeats Nixon for U.S. president
1961	Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba fails JFK meets with Khrushchev in Vienna Berlin Wall is built
New Berlin crisis
U.S.
Supreme Court's Engle v. Vitale decision SDS
Port Huron statement September—Silent Spring by Rachel Carson published
1963	Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique published
Protests in South Vietnam; U.S. Supreme Court's Abingdon v. Schempp decision
John F. Kennedy assassinated; Lyndon B. Johnson becomes president
1964	LBJ announces Great Society
Free Speech Movement at University of California, Berkeley
LBJ defeats Goldwater, elected to a full term as president
1965	Martin Luther King awarded Nobel Peace Prize
Malcolm X assassinated; bombing of North Vietnam and troop increases
LBJ signs Elementary and Secondary Education Act
LBJ signs Medicare-Medicaid Act LBJ signs Voter Registration Act LBJ signs Immigration Reform act
1967	Martin Luther King's Riverside Speech attacking the War in Vietnam
1968	Tet Offensive in Vietnam
Eugene McCarthy's success in New Hampshire Primary
Robert Kennedy enters presidential race
Johnson announces he will not seek reelection
Martin Luther King, Jr. assassinated Riots in major cities Columbia University sit-in Robert Kennedy assassinated Democratic National Convention and riots Richard M. Nixon elected president
Joan Baez and Bob Dylan, singing together at the 1963 Newport Folk Festival, represented a new folk music that was often linked directly to protest movements.
Films and music had possibly even more influence on Americans. In the 1960s, film and music took on a new and harder edge. Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Strangelove portrayed the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union as crazed militarists willing to destroy the world. Later in the decade, Bonnie and Clyde (1967), The Wild Bunch, and Easy Rider (both 1969) showed a level of violence not previously seen in film, reminding audiences that this world was still a very violent one.
Many who had enjoyed the provocative rock ‘n’ roll sexuality of Elvis in the 1950s listened to the provocative protest folk songs of Bob Dylan and Joan Baez in the early 1960s and later to the drug-influenced acid rock of Jimi Hendrix, Pink Floyd, and the Grateful Dead in the later 1960s. Change, protest, and disengagement were increasingly reflected in film and song.
Protest songs and angry movies, however, did not completely dominate the media in the 1960s. The sentimental celebration of love and marriage, The Sound of Music (1965), earned
$100 million, the highest gross income of any movie up to that time. The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet continued to be one of the most popular TV series up to 1966. In addition, the traditional music on the Lawrence Welk Show and the symphonic pop music of Henry Mancini competed with folk and rock throughout the decade. The sixties were far from a unified decade, in culture or politics, but the very depth of the disunity was one of the hallmarks of the times.
The Student Movement of the 1960s
Universities had long been the location for challenges to the norms of the larger society. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, there were many student demonstrations. But the sheer numbers of students and the new attitudes of the baby boom generation who came to college in the 1960s transformed college life. In 1947, as a result of the GI Bill, college enrollments reached an historic high, and they continued to grow in each following decade.
Budgets for higher education grew even faster than enrollments. As sociologist and 1960s student activist Todd Gitlin noted, “By 1960 the United States was the first society in the history of the world with more college students than farmers.” Ten years later, the nation had three times as many students as farmers. Although most of the students of the late 1940s and 1950s had been relatively quiet, the students of the 1960s were not.
Students who had founded the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) in 1960 met at Port Huron, Michigan, in 1962 to draft a statement of their beliefs. The 1962 Port Huron statement, of which Tom Hayden, then a graduate student, was the prime author, began, “We are people of this generation, bred in at least modest comfort, housed now in universities, looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit.” Recognizing their baby boom origins, the statement continued, “Many of us began maturing in complacency, but then, [a]s we grew, however, our comfort was penetrated by events too troubling to dismiss....the Southern struggle against racial bigotry [and] the enclosing fact of the Cold War. ’ The Port Huron statement noted, “a yearning to believe there is an alternative to the present, that something can be done to change circumstances in the school, the work places, the bureaucracies, the
750 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
thinking historically
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring, 1962
Rachel Carson grew up in an isolated rural community 15 miles northeast of Pittsburgh on the Allegheny River. As an adult, she worked for the federal Fish and Wildlife Service while also writing independently, publishing The Sea Around Us, a description of life in the ocean in 1951 .The book was a great success, and Carson decided to then take on a study of the impact of DDT and other chemicals on the environment. The result was Carson's most famous book, Silent Spring, which not only caught public imagination but also changed the way many Americans thought about the environment. Silent Spring was first published as a series of articles in The New Yorker in 1962, then published as a book that same year, and in 1963, aired as part of a CBS television series in 1963. Carson warned:
Since the mid-1940s over 200 basic chemicals have been created for use in killing insects, weeds, rodents, and other organisms described in the modern vernacular as "pests"; and they are sold under several thousand different brand names.
These sprays, dusts, and aerosols are now applied almost universally to farms, gardens, forests, and homes—nonselec-tive chemicals that have the power to kill every insect, the "good" and the "bad," to still the song of birds and the leaping of fish in the streams, to coat the leaves with deadly film, and to linger on in the soil—all this though the intended target may be only a few weeds or insects. Can anyone believe it is possible to lay down such a barrage of poisons on the surface of the earth without making it unfit for all life? They should not be called "insecticides," but "biocides."
Along with praise for the book, Carson was criticized, most of all by the chemical industry whose products her research and
writings indicted. Spokespersons for some of the major chemical companies and even some of Carson's former colleagues in the Department of Agriculture attacked the book as an effort to turn the clock back to a time when insect-born diseases, most of all malaria, killed thousands and wiped out crops causing widespread starvation.
President Kennedy, however, was impressed enough with the book to order his Science Advisory Committee to review it. When the committee confirmed her findings, Kennedy and subsequent administrations took further action, banning the domestic use of DDT. Later in 1970, President Nixon signed the legislation creating the Environmental Protection Agency to consolidate the government's efforts to protect the environment that Carson loved.
Source: Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962). Two of the several studies analyzing Rachel Carson and Silent Spring as well as its impact on the subsequent environmental movement: Mark Hamilton Lytle, The Gentle Subversive: Rachel Carson, Silent Spring, and the Rise of the Environmental Movement (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007) and Priscilla Coit Murphy, What a Book Can Do: The Publication and Reception of Silent Spring (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2005).
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
How might Carson have responded to critics in the chemical industry? How might the public have evaluated their criticism? How might people's jobs or political views impact their response?
2.	Contextualization
Thinking about earlier conservation efforts, like those of
Teddy Roosevelt, how was Carson different?
nra
government... .It is to this latter yearning, at once the spark and engine of change, that we direct our present appeal.” The spark and the yearning to believe there is an alternative to the present,” would characterize the decade of the 1960s for many people, especially the young.
Not long after SDS was launched, another student movement emerged at the University of California at Berkeley. In the fall of 1964, the Berkeley administration issued a directive that student organizations that were raising funds for off-campus causes such as civil rights using tables set up on the university grounds had to move those efforts off campus. Opposition to the directive quickly united students. When petitions and meetings with the university administration did not resolve the issue, a group of students, some of whom had spent the previous summer in the South as part of Mississippi Freedom Summer, called for civil disobedience in Berkeley.
Students brought their tables back to campus and waited to see what would happen. Before long, campus police arrived and arrested Jack Weinberg who had been
Chapter
langed 751
sitting at one of the tables, placing him in a police car. Quickly, some 3,000 students surrounded the car, and for the next 32 hours, while Weinberg sat in the car, speaker after speaker used the top of the car as a platform. The long spontaneous rally launched the free speech movement at Berkeley.
In December of that year, at a much larger student rally on the Berkeley campus, Mario Savio, a junior philosophy major who emerged as the prime voice of the student protest during the siege of the police car, told his fellow students, There s a time when the operation of the machine becomes so odious.. .you’ve got to put your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels, upon the levers, upon all the apparatus and you’ve got to make it stop.” Hundreds marched into the administration building to stop the university’s wheels. They sat in for two days until arrested. Berkeley remained a center of student protest.
Quick Review How did student protest, changes in popular music, and the inauguration of John F. Kennedy symbolize the changes coming to the United States in the early 1960s?
26.2
CAMELOT, THE WHITE HOUSE, AND DALLAS—THE KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION___________________________________________________________
Analyze the successes and failures of the Kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the United States.
The student protests were but one aspect of the changes taking place in the early 1960s. The January 1961 inauguration of John F. Kennedy (referred to often as JFK) brought the youngest president elected in the nation’s history to replace the oldest. A new generation was taking charge of the country from college campuses to the White House. Kennedy partisans remembered his years in office as “one brief shining moment”—to cite the lines of the then-popular Camelot, a Broadway play about medieval glory to which the Kennedy’s glamour was often compared. Certainly John Kennedy, his young and attractive wife Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy, and their extended family made for a dramatic comparison with the sometimes dowdy Eisenhowers. They were able to project an image of glamour, youth, vigor (the president’s favorite word, pronouncing it with his Boston accent as “vigah”), and wit. The press loved to spar with Kennedy and he with them. During the Kennedy years, the White House was the scene of gala events, concerts, and dinner parties not seen in Washington for some time. The hopes and expectations for change that arrived with Kennedy were unmistakable.
The New Frontier
Civil rights advocates also had high hopes for the Kennedy administration, believing that the new president, who had gone out of his way as a candidate to support Martin Luther King, Jr., would do more to support the cause of civil rights than Eisenhower. The Kennedy administration created a Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities headed by Vice President Johnson to look into discrimination in hiring. They hired blacks in the federal government, including some in high positions in the civil and foreign service. JFK nominated African-Americans, including Thurgood Marshall, to federal judgeships. During the presidential campaign in 1960, Kennedy promised to introduce a new federal civil rights bill if elected. But throughout 1961 and 1962, no such bill emerged from the White House. He also had promised to end racial discrimination in federal housing with the “stroke of a pen,” but when no order emerged, civil rights organizers started sending thousands of pens to him.
Kennedy was slow to move on civil rights for many reasons. He could count votes in the Congress, and southern Senators with high seniority made congressional action hard to imagine. The Kennedys were also good at gauging voter interest, and in 1961
752 PartVIll Fears,Joys,and Limits, 1945-1980
Jacqueline Kennedy and her husband made the White House a center of grace and culture as in this reception honoring Nobel Prize winners including the poet Robert Frost and the novelist Pearl Buck.
and 1962, not that many white voters seemed interested in civil rights issues. At the same time, J. Edgar Hoover hated Martin Luther King, Jr., and was convinced that he was a sexual degenerate and a Communist. He had tapes to prove extramarital activity on King’s part, if nothing to show that he was a Communist. Hoover also had tapes to prove President Kennedy’s considerable extramarital activities, which may well have made both Kennedy brothers reluctant to challenge Hoover, who they allowed to tap King’s telephones. Whatever the reasons, the vaunted Kennedy vigor was not brought to civil rights.
In other areas, Kennedy’s New Frontier, as he called his domestic policy, was more successful. Working closely with House Speaker Sam Rayburn, the administration was able to win an increase in the federally mandated minimum wage. At their urging, Congress also provided funds for job training and tougher regulations for testing new drugs before they went on the market. JFK was the first president since Herbert Hoover to include no women in the cabinet, but he appointed Eleanor Roosevelt to head the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women that recommended federal laws against sex discrimination. Kennedy issued executive orders ending sex discrimination in the federal civil service and signed a 1963 Equal Pay Act that mandated equal pay for equal work. In part because of his mentally ill sister, Kennedy cared deeply about mental health and, at his urging, Congress passed the Mental Retardation Facilities and Community Mental Health Act in 1963 that funded support for mental health programs.
In May 1961, Kennedy, who had been critical of the lack of interest in space exploration by the Eisenhower administration, advocated a significant increase in funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and made a promise that within 10 years the United States would safely land a man on the moon. Although Kennedy did not live to see the promise fulfilled, in 1969, the nation celebrated that accomplishment.
Ihe chair of his Council of Economic Advisers, Walter Heller, convinced Kennedy that a tax cut would stimulate the economy leading to greater prosperity for Americans and improved standing of the Kennedy administration with voters. Kennedy fought
New Frontier
The name given to the domestic programs of the Kennedy administration (1961-1963).
Chaptei
banged 753
Engel v. Vitale
U.S.
Supreme Court decision that banned mandated prayers or devotional Bible reading in American public schools. hard for the tax cut and won. Nevertheless, the domestic record was disappointing to the administration, which would have liked to see faster congressional action on many of its proposals. The New York Times for November 12, 1963, said, Rarely has there been such a pervasive attitude of discouragement around Capitol Hill.. .This has been one of the least productive sessions of Congress within the memory of most of its members.”
Religion, Education, and the Courts
Just as Kennedy had his reasons for not wanting to deal with civil rights, he also had very strong reasons for not wanting to deal with the issue of religion. As the first Catholic to be elected president, he wanted to steer clear of anything that might imply his religion was influencing his work. But as with civil rights, issues of religion were bubbling.
On June 25, 1962, the U.S. Supreme Court announced its decision in the case of Engel v. Vitale. By a 6-1 vote, the Court declared that schools in New York State could not open the school day with prayer. The specific issue in Engel v. Vitale was of relatively recent origin. As the Cold War led to a fear of “godless communism,” the New York State Board of Regents, which had responsibility for all public schools in the state of New York, recommended—but did not require—opening the school day with prayer. Then in 1958, the board composed a short official prayer, “Almighty God, we acknowledge our dependence upon Thee, and we beg Thy blessings upon us, our parents, our teachers and our Country.” It was as inoffensive as a prayer could be, and any students who objected could be excused when it was recited. Nevertheless, the prayer caused problems. Nonbelievers did not want to say any prayer. Devout believers found such a bland prayer close to blasphemy. When Joseph and Daniel Roth asked to be excused from their Long Island classroom during the prayer because their father asked them to, they were taunted. Their father, Lawrence Roth, challenged the prayer in court. As the case was combined with others and moved through the courts, it generated public attention and anger. In the end, Justice Hugo Black spoke for the Supreme Court majority in saying, “We think that the constitutional prohibition against laws respecting an establishment of religion must at least mean that in this country it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers.”
A year later, the court went further. Edward and Sidney Schempp challenged the policy of the Abington Township School Board (Pennsylvania), which opened the school day with a Bible reading and the Lord’s Prayer. In a 1963 decision, Abington School Board v. Schempp, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that, no matter who composed the prayers, the school board’s practices or any devotional reading of scriptures or recitation of prayers was unconstitutional. The court went out of its way to insist that the academic study of religion, including the study of the Bible “for its literary and historic qualities,” was not only constitutional but also to be encouraged. However, it was not the business of government, the Court said, to lead devotional activities.
The Supreme Court’s decisions provoked a fire storm. Many Americans, Protestants and Catholics, claimed that the court was “legislating God out of the public schools and that historic practices that “had never bothered anyone” were being undermined by an unusually activist Warren court. New York Congressman Frank J. Becker proposed an amendment to the Constitution to allow voluntary prayer and Bible reading. The evangelist Billy Graham said, “The trend of taking God and moral teaching from the schools is a diabolical scheme.” Alabama Governor George Wallace said, I don t care what they say in Washington, we are going to keep right on praying and reading the Bible in the public schools of Alabama.” While Catholics had once opposed devotional activities in public schools, sure that they would be Protestant, now New York Archbishop Francis Cardinal Spellman said he was “shocked and frightened by the court’s decisions. For large numbers of Americans, the decisions were the beginnings of a cultural war that would last for decades.
754
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Kennedy's Foreign Policy—From the Bay of Pigs to the Cuban Missile Crisis
In a private conversation with his defeated rival, Richard Nixon, President Kennedy asked Nixon, Foreign affairs is the only important issue for a president to handle, isn’t it? Kennedy said he really didnt care about the minimum wage ‘compared to something like Cuba. While Americans receiving minimum wage might care a great deal about it, Kennedy s focus was, indeed, Cuba, Germany, Vietnam, China, and perhaps most of all the Soviet Union. In his inaugural address, Kennedy had promised to pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and success of liberty. He came to office a devout Cold Warrior and remained one.
The first test of Kennedy’s Cold War resolve came early. The corrupt government of Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista had been overthrown at the beginning of 1959 in the middle of Eisenhower’s second term. The new revolutionary government led by Fidel Castro was very popular in the United States during its first few months in office. Castro was welcomed in the United States and even appeared on the Ed Sullivan Show. Organized crime, which had enjoyed a haven for gambling and prostitution in Cuba under Batista, was driven out by Castro to the applause of most Americans. However the Cuban-American relationship quickly soured. The new revolutionary government executed a number of Batista supporters—too many, most Americans thought. As part of its land reform efforts, the Castro government seized the island’s large commercial enterprises, including vast holdings of American sugar and oil companies. Unhappy business interests—legitimate and illegitimate—began a public relations campaign against the new Cuban government. Castro’s communist leanings also became clearer as Cuba developed close ties with the Soviet Union. Before long, Soviet military advisers arrived in Cuba. By the time Kennedy came to office in January 1961, many considered Cuba to be a virtual satellite of the Soviet Union. The Eisenhower administration had developed plans to train a volunteer force to invade the island. Influential people, including JFK’s father, former ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy, urged Kennedy to take action. While some advisers had reservations, Allen Dulles, the head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), was a strong advocate, and Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved the invasion.
On April 15, 1961, less than 3 months after JFK took office, American-based planes made an initial bombing run against the island. Two days later, a brigade of 1,400 U.S. volunteer troops landed at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba’s south coast. The plan was for the force to connect with other Cuban anti-Castro forces that the CIA was convinced were ready to rise up against the regime. In fact, no internal revolt sprang up. Cuban defenses were strong. When the attackers called for further air support from the United States, Kennedy refused. He had become convinced that the attack was doomed. Within hours, 114 of the invaders were killed and 1,189 taken prisoner. The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a huge embarrassment for Kennedy. He took personal responsibility for the failure. He also fired Allen Dulles. For the rest of his term, Kennedy would be more cautious and less willing to trust advisers in the CIA.
Kennedy’s first summit with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev took place in June 1961 in Vienna, just 2 months after the Bay of Pigs crisis. The meeting did not go well. Khrushchev gloated over the Soviet Union s success in getting the first man into space when Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth in April. He also made threatening comments about Berlin. Khrushchev seemed to believe that the new president was weak and could be brow-beaten. In fact, his actions only strengthened Kennedy s inclination to show he could be tough. Two months later, Khrushchev ordered the construction of what came to be known as the Berlin Wall to separate the Soviet zone of the city from the western zone and the construction of similar barriers separating all of East Germany from West Germany. German Communists complained that their socialist system provided free education for people who then took their skills west to make more money. After August 1961, no such easy movement, nor were family visits or other travel possible.
26,1
26.2
263
Bay of Pigs
A 1961 invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro rebels backed by the Kennedy administration that was quickly defeated, much to Kennedy's embarrassment.
Berlin Wall
A substantive partition built by East Germany on instructions from the Soviet Union that cut off all travel between East and West Berlin from 1961 to 1989.
Ch^fiM&Lives Changed 755
MEDIUM RANGE BALLISTIC MISSILE BASE IN CUBA SAN CRISTOBAL
Cuban missile crisis
A tense standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union in October 1962 at which each country stood on the brink of nuclear war over the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
An American surveillance plane took pictures like this one of missile facilities in Cuba that deeply worried the Kennedy administration.
By fall, Berlin had become very tense. Some Kennedy advisers suggested that the United States should use force to stop construction of the Berlin Wall. Others wondered whether access would be blocked as it was at the time of the Berlin Airlift. By the end of October, U.S. and Russian tanks faced off in Berlin. Some wondered whether World War III was about to begin. Eventually, the United States and the Soviet Union compromised. Kennedy acknowledged that he would “rather have a wall than a war,” and that the Soviets had a right to build the Berlin Wall. Khrushchev did not try to close off American or western access to Berlin as Stalin had done. While the city remained a flash point in the Cold War, and the Berlin Wall stayed in place until November 1989, the Berlin crisis of 1961 passed.
The third major foreign policy crisis of the Kennedy administration—and the most dangerous—took place in October 1962. Again, the focus was Cuba. After the U.S. failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion, Cuban-Russian ties grew stronger and the Soviets sent more military personnel to Cuba. In the summer of 1962, the Soviets began building missile bases in Cuba that could house medium-range missiles pointed at the United States. As U.S. reconnaissance flights showed proof of the missiles in Cuba, it became clear that a major crisis—the Cuban missile crisis—was brewing.
In this crisis atmosphere, Kennedy convened an “Executive Committee” of the National Security Council. For 13 tense days in October 1962, these advisers debated the next U.S. step. Moderates led by UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson urged restraint. Why panic about a new missile site, they asked, when the United States had missiles in Turkey and there were enough submarine-based missiles to destroy the planet?

756 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Hard-liners, including former Secretary of State Dean Acheson and National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, urged an immediate U.S. attack on the missile site. A third group, led by Robert Kennedy, opposed a surprise strike, which, RFK said, would make his brother, the Tojo [the Japanese premiere who ordered the attack on Pearl Harbor] of the 1960s. The president agreed with his brother’s position and overruled the hard-liners, but he was also determined to be tough.
On October 22, President Kennedy informed Khrushchev in both a diplomatic communication and a prime-time television speech that the United States would enforce a complete quarantine” against future military shipments to Cuba and that the United States would meet any Soviet retaliation anywhere in the world with a “full retaliatory response. The stakes could not be higher. If a Soviet ship ran the blockade, it would be fired on by the United States. If the Soviets made a military move, the United States was prepared to fire missiles. Many worried that the world was on the brink of nuclear war. The next morning, as the first Soviet ships approached, people held their breaths. Then the Soviet freighters turned around. Secretary of State Dean Rusk said, “We’re eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked.”
Behind the scenes, Kennedy and Khrushchev had come to an agreement. The Soviets agreed to remove the missiles in return for an end to the quarantine of the island and a promise that the United States would not invade. The United States also agreed to remove its missiles from Turkey but did not announce its decision. An unthinkable war had been avoided. Both leaders quickly took steps to avoid a repeat of the crisis and new communication systems—especially a “hot line” from the Pentagon and White House to the Kremlin—were set up so there would be no delay in communication in any future crisis.
Some military leaders and Cuban exiles were furious at Kennedy. U.S. Air Force General Curtis LeMay (who had commanded the bombing of Tokyo in 1945) stunned the president when he told him, “It’s the greatest defeat in our history, Mr. President....We should invade today.” Others wondered whether Kennedy allowed his machismo to get the best of him when the missiles in Cuba were no more of a threat than others already in place and hardly worth a world war.
While the crises in Cuba, Berlin, and then Cuba again were the most significant of Kennedy’s foreign policy, the president also faced others. In spite of the 1960 campaign rhetoric in which Kennedy had accused Eisenhower of allowing a “missile gap” to develop between the United States and the Soviet Union, once in office, Kennedy acknowledged that no such gap existed. Nevertheless, the Kennedy administration increased military spending from $47.4 billion when it took office to $53.6 billion in its last budget. The United States expanded the number of Polaris submarines armed with missiles as well as the number of land-based missiles in the United States. Each side had enough missiles to destroy the world multiple times.
The administration created a new “flexible response policy as an alternative to Eisenhower’s “mutually assured destruction.” They gave high priority to creating “counterinsurgency” forces, named the Green Berets, that could engage in small-scale military operations in hot spots around the world. In planning for Cuba, where the administration had a special interest, they developed Operation Mongoose, a secret CIA program to destabilize the Castro regime by contaminating Cuban sugar, causing explosions in Cuban factories, and developing at least 33 plans to assassinate Castro, all of which failed.
In addition to Kennedy’s foreign policy efforts to contain communism, the administration launched a new effort at peace in Laos, support for the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID), and efforts at economic reform in Latin America and elsewhere. Kennedy also launched the Peace Corps, through an Executive Order, to recruit young idealistic Americans to spend 2 years abroad as volunteers working on education and development projects. In the spring of his first year in office, the president, joined by First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy, dazzled Europe.
20
26.2
20
Cl
jves Changed 757
Lyndon Johnson took the oath of office on board the presidential plane flanked by his wife, Lady Bird, and Jacqueline Kennedy, still wearing a bloodstained suit.
By the end of his first term, however, Kennedys foreign policy legacy was mixed. Chester Bowles, who served for a time as Undersecretary of State in the Kennedy administration, said that the Kennedy inner circle were “full of belligerence” and “sort of looking for a chance to prove their muscle.”
A nuclear-armed world was a dangerous place to do such a thing. Nevertheless, in November 1963, in spite of ongoing tensions in Southeast Asia, Berlin, and Cuba, JFK was still immensely popular in many parts of the world, and the world was at peace. The president turned his attention to his 1964 reelection campaign.
Dallas, Conspiracies, and Legacies
The Kennedy team wanted to ensure that Texas, home of the vice president, stayed Democratic in 1964. But the Democratic Party in Texas was deeply divided. There was also deep distrust of Kennedy in Texas by 1963, indeed, even a deep visceral hatred among some Texans. In November 1963, Kennedy dreaded the trip he needed to make to build his standing in the Lone Star State.
After the president and Jackie Kennedy arrived in Dallas on November 22, 1963, they rode into the city center in a
caravan, the president and First Lady along with Texas Governor John Connally and his wife in the first car, Vice President Johnson in the next one. A little after noon, as they passed the Texas School Book Depository, several shots rang out. One wounded Connally. Two hit the president. A back brace he wore for constant back pain held him erect and the second shot hit his head. By the time the president’s car reached the nearest emergency room, the president was dead. A Catholic priest offered the last rites.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson had been right behind Kennedy’s car and quickly understood what had happened. Neither Johnson nor anyone else knew how many people were involved in the assassination or how widespread the danger might be, so Johnson insisted that the presidential party wait until Kennedy’s coffin was brought to Air Force One, still parked at the airport where it had arrived that morning. In the afternoon Johnson, flanked by his wife Lady Bird and by Jacqueline Kennedy, took the presidential oath of office. Then they flew to Washington. Kennedy’s death provoked an outpouring of national grief. Suddenly, the youthful vigor that the president had projected, and the hopes that many Americans had projected onto him, seemed to dim.
Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the murder. His fingerprints were on the gun and he had easy access to the window where the shots were fired. Two days later, another troubled man, Jack Ruby, shot Oswald in the Dallas police station. Many suspected a widespread conspiracy. President Johnson asked Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren to lead a high-level bipartisan commission to find out the truth. The commission’s report—known as the Warren Report—concluded that Oswald acted alone. Not everyone was convinced; no one could confirm for sure the whole story behind Kennedy’s death. Whatever the truth, a very different kind of person became president on November 22, one who would lead the administration and the country with a dramatically different style and set of priorities.
262
Quick Review What were the major accomplishments and frustrations of the Kennedy administration?
758 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
THE COMING OF LYNDON B. JOHNSON
26.3
Analyze the successes and failures of the Johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office—the launching of the Great Society programs and the war in Vietnam.
John F. Kennedy had been born to wealth and had attended Harvard College. As a child, he had met Franklin D. Roosevelt because his father was Roosevelts ambassador to Great Britain. He was elected to Congress as a war hero after his small boat, PT-109 had been sunk in the Pacific during World War II, and he had served 8 years in the U.S. Senate before becoming president. Kennedy was handsome and charismatic, important factors in his election and continuing popularity.
Lyndon Johnson was born to poverty in the Texas hill country northwest of San Antonio and grew up in a small house in Johnson City when there were no sidewalks or electricity. His tough and slightly wild father served in the Texas legislature, trying hard to make ends meet, and his strong-willed mother yearned for a better life. LBJ, as he was often called, attended Southwest Texas State Teachers College. He arrived in Washington as a congressional secretary a year before Roosevelt was elected and managed to meet FDR, whom he idolized and who in 1935 appointed the then 26-year-old LBJ as the director of the National Youth Administration for the state of Texas. Johnson worked harder than any other NYA state director, got important services for Texas, and never forgot the value of government when he saw the New Deal bring jobs, electricity, and hope to people living isolated lives in rural poverty.
Johnson had a long and distinguished career in Congress before becoming vice president. He was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1937. He campaigned tirelessly and worked equally tirelessly once in office, building strong ties and coalitions. LBJ and his wife Lady Bird became a family for the sometimes lonely bachelor, Sam Rayburn, another Texan, who served as Speaker of the House for all but 4 years between 1940 and 1961. LBJ lost a primary race for a Senate seat in 1941 but won the seat in 1948. Once in the Senate, Johnson built connections to the powerful committee chairs. In 1953, at the age of 45, he was elected Democratic leader in the Senate. In 1955, he suffered a severe heart attack, recovered quickly and kept working, kept building coalitions, becoming known for the “Johnson Treatment” when he would grab a colleague by the coat lapels and hold his face an inch away while using anger, humor, and statistics to win a wavering vote. He was highly respected for his ability to get things done in the Senate, even if he was often feared and seldom liked. Few said he was handsome or charismatic. Everyone said he was effective.
Johnson hated his tenure as vice president. Many of Kennedy s inner circle, especially Attorney General Robert Kennedy made sure he was kept out of the most significant decisions. Once he became president, LBJ desperately wanted to be loved as Kennedy had been, but most of all was determined to get things done in a way that Kennedy had not been able to do. On the domestic front, he succeeded masterfully at moving his agenda along before slowly sinking into the morass of Vietnam.
The War on Poverty and the Great Society
In his first speech as president, 5 days after Kennedy was shot, LBJ mourned with the nation, but he also demonstrated a confident leadership that the country was looking for. Johnson told the Congress that he was determined to continue the “Kennedy dream” of education, jobs, care for the elderly, and “equal rights for all Americans. One could question whether, given his focus on foreign policy, those goals had actually been Kennedys dream, but they would certainly be Johnsons. Thus, the first president from a former Confederate state insisted, “No memorial or oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor President Kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long.” Congress was being put on notice that the former powerful Democratic majority leader of the Senate, now president, was determined to see his legislation passed.
263
20
263
C|


20
20
American Voices
Lyndon B. Johnson, “Great Society Speech,” 1964
263
Six months after he had taken the oath of office in Dallas, Lyndon
Johnson gave the commencement address at the University of Michigan. He used the speech to outline a new program—a Johnson program to be known as the Great Society—to improve the quality of life for all Americans.
I have come today from the turmoil of your Capital to the tranquility of your campus to speak about the future of your country....
Your imagination, your initiative, and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where progress is the servant of our needs, or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled growth. For in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society.
The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice, to which we are totally committed in our time. But that is just the beginning.
The Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents....
So I want to talk to you today about three places where we begin to build the Great Society—in our cities, in our countryside, and in our classrooms....
Our society will never be great until our cities are great. Today the frontier of imagination and innovation is inside those cities and not beyond their borders.
New experiments are already going on. It will be the task of your generation to make the American city a place where future generations will come, not only to live but to live the good life....
A second place where we begin to build the Great Society is in our countryside. We have always prided ourselves on being not only America the strong and America the free, but America the beautiful. Today that beauty is in danger. The water we drink,
the food we eat, the very air that we breathe, are threatened with pollution. Our parks are overcrowded, our seashores overburdened. Green fields and dense forests are disappearing....
A third place to build the Great Society is in the classrooms of America. There your children's lives will be shaped. Our society will not be great until every young mind is set free to scan the farthest reaches of thought and imagination. We are still far from that goal....
These are three of the central issues of the Great Society....
So, will you join in the battle to give every citizen the full equality which God enjoins and the law requires, whatever his belief, or race, or the color of his skin?
Will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape from the crushing weight of poverty?
Will you join in the battle to make it possible for all nations to live in enduring peace—as neighbors and not as mortal enemies?
Will you join in the battle to build the Great Society, to prove that our material progress is only the foundation on which we will build a richer life of mind and spirit?
Source: Lyndon B. Johnson, Speech to the Graduating Class, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, May 22,1964, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Lyndon B. Johnson, Book I (1963-64), pp. 704-707.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What are some of the specific elements that Johnson included in his definition of the Great Society?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Knowing that Johnson idolized Franklin Roosevelt, what parallels do you see between the Great Society and the New Deal?
Later, after he left office, Johnson explained his approach to the presidency. “If it’s really going to work, the relationship between the President and the Congress has got to be almost incestuous. He’s got to know them even better than they know themselves. And then, on the basis of this knowledge, he’s got to build a system that stretches..., from the moment a bill is introduced to the moment it is officially enrolled as the law of the land.” And that was exactly what Johnson did. He made sure he knew who would support each bill, knew what the specific desires were of those who might be brought to support a measure, and knew how to cajole those who did not want to support it. He rewarded supporters with phone calls, personal notes, White House invitations, and special services in their states and districts, and he never hesitated to punish opponents. He came to office with a Democratic majority in both houses of Congress and a nation mourning a fallen president. He used that circumstance, plus his incredible legislative skill, to move significant legislation through an often reluctant Congress.
760 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Johnson s first agenda was the stalled civil rights bill. Everyone expected the bill that Kennedy had submitted to be watered down. Johnson, normally the great compromiser, would not allow any tampering with the bill. He was determined to keep every section intact. He broke with his Senate mentor, Richard Russell of Georgia who led the opposition to the bill, and, instead, made an alliance with the Republican Senate Minority Leader, Everett Dirksen of Illinois. With Dirksen’s help, Republicans and Democrats overcame a Russell-led filibuster. The most sweeping civil rights bill since Reconstruction was passed and signed by Johnson on July 2, 1964. It included not only provisions for equal access and equal opportunity but also specifically forbade discrimination in employment based on race, color, religion, and national origin as well as outlawed discrimination based on sex, a clause that later feminists would use most effectively. The law established a new Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to ensure enforcement.
As Johnson pushed hard for the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he also tackled a broader agenda. In his first State of the Union speech in January 1964, Johnson said, “This administration, today, here and now, declares unconditional war on poverty in America.’ Then in May, he used the commencement speech at the University of Michigan to describe what he called the Great Society, which would be how he described all of his domestic programs. Kennedy had already started efforts to attack poverty in the United States, but Johnson, the New Dealer from Texas, had seen what federally financed rural electrification did to change the lives of poor people and was passionate (see Map 26-1). He idolized Franklin Roosevelt and wanted to imitate him. He also knew that if he wanted to remain in office, he would have to face a skeptical electorate in only 11 months and he wanted to present a solid track record.
The first legislation of the war on poverty was passed by Congress in August 1964. It included provision for many of the programs later associated with the Great Society, including Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA), a domestic peace corps that recruited young people to work for a year serving in high poverty urban and rural settings; a Neighborhood Youth Corps to provide jobs for poor youth (modeled on the Civilian Conservation Corps of the New Deal era); work study loans and grants to support college students; small business loans; community action programs directed at building up grass-roots organizing ventures; Head Start to provide poor children with the same sort of readiness for kindergarten that their more well-off counterparts got at home; Neighborhood Legal Services that provided government funded lawyers for the poor; and to coordinate all of these ventures, an Office of Economic Opportunity. This impressive agenda was only a first step for Johnson, but to do more, he needed to be elected in his own right.
Johnson wanted to not only win election in 1964 but also win with such a mandate that nothing could stand in the way of his programs. Before he could, do that, however, Johnson had to face a divided Democratic Party, a Republican opponent, and his own inner demons. Johnson’s insecurities ran deep. He knew that the Kennedy family despised him. He knew that he did not have their urbane sophistication and that, a century after the Civil War, much of the country still distrusted southerners. He also knew—powerfully so—that he had become president the office he had wanted all his life—only through a terrible tragedy.
Despite his concerns, however, Americans saw LBJ as the sitting president who had taken command of the situation when JFK was killed, and Johnson had no serious resistance to the 1964 nomination. Notwithstanding, Johnson was under great pressure to name Attorney General Robert Kennedy as his running mate. There was a logic to the move; Bobby (as he was always known) was keeper of the Kennedy legacy and his nomination would unite the party. Still, as Johnson later wrote, “With Bobby on the ticket, I’d never know if I could be elected on my own.” In addition, Johnson deeply disliked Bobby Kennedy. He was convinced that Bobby had tried to derail his own vice presidential nomination in 1960. Eventually, LBJ informed Bobby that he
26/1
20
26.3
The Great Society
The name Lyndon Johnson gave to his far-reaching domestic program, which included federal aid to education, Medicare and Medicaid health insurance, immigration reform, and a Voting Rights Act.
Ch|
MAP 26-1 Americans in Poverty. This map shows the percentage and distribution of Americans living below the poverty line at the end of the 1960s.
would not be his running mate and, instead, supported him in a successful run for the U.S. Senate from New York. Johnson selected liberal Minnesota Senator Hubert Humphrey to be his vice president. Humphrey, though more liberal than Kennedy or Johnson, was also deeply loyal to Johnson, perhaps even to a fault.
The most serious challenge to Johnson’s easy nomination came from the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP), in which grass-roots civil rights activists sought the convention seats of the regular Mississippi delegation that had been elected in white-only caucuses (see Chapter 25). Although Johnson was a supporter of civil rights, he was concerned that, if the "regular” Mississippi delegates were unseated by the Mississippi Freedom delegates and walked out, and those from
762 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Cl
Changed 763
One of the most effective political advertisements of all time began with a little girl pulling petals off of a daisy and, as she finishes, the screen morphs into a nuclear explosion and ends, "Vote for President Johnson on November 3."The ad was part of an effective campaign in which Democrats painted the Republican nominee, Barry Goldwater, as ready to lead America into nuclear war.
Alabama and other nearby states joined them, then it would threaten the Democrats’ hold on several southern states. Johnson did not want to risk a repeat of the 1948 Dixiecrat revolt. Neither Johnson nor other party leaders understood the depth of anger that stirred the MFDP protest, nor did they see, as the MFDP leaders did, the way in which the movement represented a new form of grass-roots democracy. Neither the choice of running mate nor the MFDP challenge hurt Johnson’s election chances, but both illustrated deep divides in American politics that even Johnson’s masterful negotiating skills could not bridge.
The Republican Party was also deeply divided in 1964.
The original front runner for the Republican nomination, New York’s liberal governor Nelson Rockefeller, had left his wife of many years to marry a younger woman.
At that point, the country had never elected a divorced person as president. There was also further opposition to Rockefeller’s nomination. Many conservative Republicans were determined that in 1964 the party would nominate a “real conservative,” and Rockefeller’s main opponent for the nomination was a true conservative, Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater.
Goldwater, an affable and tolerant individual, had friends across the political spectrum and spurned personal racial prejudice. However, he opposed civil rights legislation as an invasion of personal freedom. He felt the same way about the graduated income tax and most other government programs. Further, he called for a more aggressive opposition to communism than that taken by Eisenhower, Kennedy, or Johnson, even in places where communist regimes were well established, saying that America, “could lob one into the men’s room at the Kremlin.” He won most of the primary contests, and when the Republican convention met in San Francisco, the delegates were so committed to him that they shouted down Nelson Rockefeller. When Goldwater spoke, he said, “Let me remind you that extremism in defense of liberty is no vice... and that moderation in pursuit of justice is no virtue.” It was just what the delegates wanted to hear. It was less popular, however, with the wider electorate.
The Democrats made good use of Goldwater’s statements, developed a sophisticated television advertising campaign, and painted Goldwater as a dangerous man. Johnson won in a landslide. As he left the inaugural ball in January 1965, Johnson told his staff, “Don’t stay up late. There’s work to be done. We’re on our way to the Great Society.” The next day that work started.
In the spring of 1965, the triumphant Johnson pushed four major pieces of legislation through Congress in addition to a raft of other bills that, on their own, would have been considered significant with any other Congress. The core Great Society legislation of 1965 included federal aid to education, Medicare and Medicaid, immigration reform, and a Voting Rights Act.
Johnson knew that federal aid to education had been blocked for many years by civil rights activists out of the fear that aid might go only to segregated schools and by a deadlock between Catholic representatives, who would not support aid unless it went to parochial as well as public schools, and many Protestant representatives, who would never support aid to Catholic schools. Johnson was determined to break the deadlock. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 solved the first issue since it made it illegal for any segregated institution to receive federal aid. Johnson solved the divide on religion with a policy by which federal education funds would follow the child, whichever school the
25.1 j
.j
1
i
262 5
263
child was in. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act was submitted to Congress in January 1965 and passed in 3 months. Johnson signed it at a ceremony in front of a school that he had once attended, with one of his former teachers sitting beside him.
Every Democratic president since Franklin Roosevelt had also sought to provide federal health insurance, especially for the elderly. A coalition, led by the American Medical Association, fearing government control of medical practices, stopped every effort. However, half of all Americans over 65 had no health insurance and they, too, were a powerful constituency. Within months of being proposed, Congress created Medicare, offering basic medical insurance to everyone over 65. Arkansas Congressman Wilbur Mills, a close Johnson ally, added a provision to the Medicare bill, creating Medicaid, which provided federal funding for medical insurance to Americans living in poverty. For some old and poor people, the resulting Medicare and Medicaid legislation enabled the first visit to a medical doctor in their lives.
Even though there was not a lot of pressure to reform the nation s immigration laws in the 1960s, Johnson was determined to make immigration reform a part of the Great Society. The highly restrictive laws of 1921 and 1923 drastically limited immigration, virtually cutting off anyone from eastern Europe, Africa, or Asia (see Chapter 19). Pressure for change came from New York Representative Emanuel Celler who had tried and failed to get an exception to the old and restrictive “national origin” quotas so that Jews could flee Nazi Germany and who was now determined to change the law (see Chapter 23).
The Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the old quotas though it hardly made immigration easy. The legislation held the total number of immigrants at 290,000 (the number who were expected annually under the old law), but established priorities for education and skills rather than national origin. The law also provided an important loophole, allowing immigration above the new quota for close relatives of U.S. citizens, including foreigners who married a citizen. Although little change was expected when the legislation was signed, the new immigration law represented the beginning of a significant new era of immigration, one that matched and then exceeded the number of immigrants who came to the United States from 1890 to 1920.
The fourth major piece of legislation that Congress enacted in 1965 was the Voting Rights Act. As 1965 began, Johnson did not have additional civil rights legislation on his agenda. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the most significant Congressional intervention in civil rights since Reconstruction. Johnson wanted to focus in 1965 on other aspects of his Great Society and did not relish another round of conflict with Richard Russell and other southern Senators. Civil rights leaders, however, did not mean to take a back seat to anyone else’s agenda.
Martin Luther King, Jr., decided to create a national confrontation around the right to vote (see Chapter 25). The 1964 Civil Rights Act banned segregation in public accommodations and the use of federal funds for any segregated institution, but it did not address the right to vote. In many parts of the Deep South, more than 90 percent of blacks were kept off the voting rolls. As they had for decades, county voting registrars used literacy tests and other techniques to make it extremely hard for a black person to register to vote, and, as Fannie Lou Hammer s eloquent testimony at the 1964 Democratic convention showed, when legal techniques failed, outright violence was used. The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party may not have gotten seated at that 1964 convention, but they had made an impression on many Americans. King and the SCLC were determined to keep the issue of the vote for African-Americans alive. When they selected Selma, Alabama, as the site for a major confrontation, SNCC, which had focused on voting rights from its founding, agreed to join. Segregation in Selma was rigid, despite the Civil Rights Act. The city of 29,000 included 15,000 blacks of voting age. Only 355 of those black citizens were registered to vote.
The demonstrations in Selma, Alabama, and the violent response shocked the world. On Sunday, March 7, as the Selma marchers began to cross the Edmund Pettis
764 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Bridge, sheriffs deputies charged them on horseback, clubbing people right and left. John Lewis, the head of SNCC (and a future member of Congress) was one of several people who were knocked unconscious. Pictures of “Bloody Sunday,” as the day became known, were shown around the world. Two weeks later, marchers, now protected at Johnson s directive by the Alabama National Guard, finally completed a march to the state capital of Montgomery. That evening, the marchers happily sang “We have overcome.” But the same evening, KKK members followed one of their supporters, Viola Liuzzo of Detroit, as she drove black marchers home from the event, and killed her. The country had had enough of this sort of violence.
Only a week after the Bloody Sunday march, Johnson went before Congress to give one of his most memorable speeches. He told Congress and the nation:
This time, on this issue, there must be no delay, no hesitation, and no compromise with our purpose... .Because it is not just Negroes, but really it is all of us who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall overcome.
263
20
263
Hearing the first president from the South since the Civil War speak uncompromisingly of the right to vote while using the words of the civil rights movement’s hymn moved many to tears.
The Voting Rights Act, which with unrelenting pressure from Johnson passed Congress by overwhelming majorities, gave the U.S. Department of Justice the right to intervene in any county where 50 percent or fewer of the eligible voters were registered—virtually all of the Deep South. Agents could monitor literacy or other tests and if necessary appoint new federal registrars. On August 6, 1965, Johnson signed
263
262
263
With the Voting Rights Act, the Immigration Act, Medicare and Medicaid, and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, and a host of other measures, Johnson was doing what he knew how to do best, getting federal legislation, federal money, and federal enforcement powers to address specific issues. He was certainly not without his critics. Many worried that the education funds were being used to expand already bloated school bureaucracies. Medicare and Medicaid seemed to be a huge new federal program that would eventually bankrupt the country. The Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts, though popular, also created disaffection with Johnson and the Democratic Party that would, as Johnson knew, turn many southerners into Republicans.
Johnson’s own personality was also a problem. Although he was a master of legislation and gave some of the most memorable speeches of any president, he was also a very difficult person. He could be crude and cruel, especially to those closest to him. George Reedy, who served as Johnson’s Press Secretary and saw him close up, said, “[A]s a human being he was a miserable person—a bully, sadist, lout, and egoist.... [H]is lapses from civilized conduct were deliberate and usually intended to subordinate someone else do to his will.” Such behavior might be effective when arm twisting was the only way to get a bill through Congress, but they also left precious little reservoir of good will when Johnson got into trouble. After 1965, Johnson got into a lot of trouble, especially in foreign policy.
Reflecting on the Johnson administration, Averill Harriman, a senior adviser to every president from Roosevelt to Johnson, said, “LBJ was great in domestic affairs.... [I]f it hadn’t been for...Vietnam he’d have been the greatest President ever.” In analyses of the Johnson presidency, “If it hadn’t been for Vietnam” is a steady refrain. The war in Vietnam destroyed national support for Johnson and the Great Society. The war divided Americans as no war since the Civil War. Opposition to and support for the war created a new political divide within the country and destroyed many long-standing allegiances. Cynicism about the conduct of the war became cynicism about government itself and eventually all authorities. The war cost 58,000 American lives, and many thousands more were wounded in body and mind in the turmoil of Vietnam. Whatever one’s ultimate judgments about the U.S. effort in Vietnam, it is impossible to understand the history of the United States in the late 1960s and beyond without understanding the impact of that war.
Vietnam
Kennedy’s foreign policy priorities were Cuba and Berlin. Until the final weeks of his life, he did not pay a lot of attention to Vietnam. When Kennedy became president, the United States had less than 1,000 troops in Vietnam, sent to train the South Vietnamese army. Slowly, JFK authorized small increases not only to train troops but also to join them on combat missions against infiltrators from the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) and their allied South Vietnamese insurgents organized as the National Liberation Front (NLF). So called counterinsurgency and strategic hamlet programs were designed to find and destroy enemy forces. Unfortunately, the violence of these missions and the corruption of the South Vietnamese regime under the leadership of the increasingly despotic Ngo Dinh Diem undermined popular support. Diem was part of a Catholic elite minority in a country where the majority was Buddhist. Although his Christianity and his anti-Communism made him an appealing figure in the United States, his despotic and corrupt administration alienated many Vietnamese.
In the summer of 1963, fierce protests were mounted within South Vietnam against the Diem regime. Quang Due, a Buddhist monk, burned himself to death on June 11 to protest conditions, and more protests and self-immolations followed. Kennedy’s new ambassador to Vietnam, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., lost all faith in Diem and, with Kennedy s tacit agreement, supported a military coup against Diem. The CIA-backed coup took place on November 1, and Diem and his brother were killed, something Kennedy had not necessarily expected. And then, 3 weeks later, Kennedy was dead, and some 17,000 U.S. military “advisers” were in Vietnam.
766 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
As he became president, LBJ wanted to use the office to focus on domestic policy. From the beginning, however, he felt he could not ignore Vietnam, and like Kennedy, Eisenhower, and Truman, he insisted, “I am not going to be the President who saw Southeast Asia go the way China went [to communism].” It was a fateful vow. Equally fateful was the fact that, on balance, Johnson himself was as insecure about foreign policy as he was secure about domestic policy. Winning a war was a very different thing from getting Congress to pass a bill. LBJ kept Kennedy’s foreign policy advisers, and most of them were convinced that communism had to be contained around the globe. If communist North Vietnam threatened noncommunist South Vietnam, then, they believed, the United States needed to protect the noncommunist south, however unpalatable the fight might be.
Plans for expanding the war were on Johnson’s desk from the day he became president and, although he eventually implemented them, he did delay expanding the U.S. involvement in Vietnam (see Map 26-3). He wanted to defeat Barry Goldwater in the 1964 elections, and part of his strategy was to paint Goldwater as a crazy warmonger.
He also wanted to get the Great Society legislation through Congress. Even so, Johnson said in retrospect, I knew from the start that I was bound to be crucified either way I moved. If I left the woman I really loved—the Great Society—in order to get involved with that bitch of a war on the other side of the world, then I would lose everything at home... .But if I left that war and let the Communists take over South Vietnam, then I would be seen as a coward and my nation would be seen as an appeaser.”
Johnson convinced himself that being “seen as an appeaser” in Vietnam would lead to new Soviet and Chinese aggression elsewhere, just as appeasement with Germany had led to World War II. He was intimidated by the Kennedy legacy of toughness in foreign policy and was convinced that, if he did not find a way to save South Vietnam, “There would be Robert Kennedy out in front leading the fight against me, telling everyone that I had betrayed John Kennedy’s commitment to South Vietnam....that I was a coward.” For a Texan who had grown up on stories of the heroes of the Alamo, being called a coward was simply beyond contemplation. Johnson’s fear proved to be ironic since, 4 years later, Robert Kennedy would run as an antiwar candidate against Johnson.
Throughout 1964, LBJ increased the military advisers modestly, from 17,000 to 23,000, but he did all he could to keep Vietnam off of the front pages in the election year after the 1963 CIA-backed coup in South Vietnam. The one big exception came on August 1, when there were reports that a North Vietnamese torpedo boat fired on the U.S. destroyer Maddox, Johnson ordered an immediate military response. Johnson also went to Congress and asked for a resolution granting him the right to use all necessary measures” to repel any attacks against the U.S. forces in Vietnam. The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution passed easily—unanimously in the House and with only two dissenting votes in the Senate—and in later years, it was this resolution, rather than any further congressional action, that presidents Johnson and Nixon used to prosecute the war. Only years later did historians discover that there was no solid evidence that anything had been fired at the Maddox, or a second destroyer that had come to aid it, during the August encounter, but Johnson got the power he wanted.
After Johnson’s inauguration in January 1965, the military situation in South Vietnam deteriorated badly—North Vietnamese forces controlled perhaps half the land and people of the south. Johnson’s key foreign policy advisers, especially Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, urged a major escalation of U.S. involvement. Some, especially Undersecretary of State George Ball, opposed escalation but, in early 1965, most were calling for more troops.
In February 1965, Johnson said, “I can’t ask our American soldiers out there to continue to fight with one hand tied behind their backs, and launched a major bombing campaign against North Vietnam to stop the flow of supplies to the south. As the bombing expanded—3,600 runs in April, 4,800 by June—the United States also sent more ground forces to protect the American air base at Danang. Once there, these
26.1
20
26.3
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
Legislation passed by Congress in 1964 that allowed the United States to use force to protect U.S. interests in Vietnam.
CHINA
Bill Vietnam
Major battles or actions Major North Vietnamese supply routes into South Vietnam NLF-North Vietnamese victory and U.S. withdrawal, April 30,1975
Capitals
U.S. and South Vietnamese
troop movements
“Boat People” refugees after 1975
la Drang
M
Ban Me Thuoi
Nha Trang Dalat
S o u 1 h China Se
Bien Hoa Cholon
Saigon: Tet offensive Jan. 30-Feb., 1968
Hue: Tet offensive Jan. 30-Feb., 1968 ia Nang Ioian
Quang Ngai Dak To
MAP 26-3 The War in Vietnam. Vietnam, South and North, and sites of major battles in the U.S.-led war.
troops also engaged in battle and then needed more troops to support them. Fifty-thousand troops were in Vietnam by April of 1965, and the number rose to 75,000 by midsummer. By July, Secretary McNamara, noting that the bombing alone was not defeating the northern forces, urged that the U.S. troop strength be increased from 75,000 to more than 200,000. Johnson agreed. But he did not want to go to Congress for authorization, fearing that it would disrupt the Great Society legislation. So, he quietly asked for an additional appropriation for the war and announced a troop increase at a midday news conference devoted to other issues. The result was that although Johnson won short-term success for his domestic programs, he planted the seeds of long-term distrust.
For the next 2 years, combat in Vietnam expanded. Eventually, half a million U.S. troops were in Vietnam. Numbers at that level could be sustained only by an increased
768
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
As more and more U.S. soldiers arrived in Vietnam, they found themselves on more patrols such as the one pictured here.

military draft. Deferments became difficult to get, especially for minority and working-class men. Casualty numbers also grew, undermining morale among the troops and at home. Costs mushroomed. In 1965, the military budget was $49.6 billion; by 1968, it was $80.5 billion. Try as they might, the U.S. commanders could not get the South Vietnamese army to play a major role in the war. They avoided battle when they could and seemed to have an uncanny way of knowing where danger was and leaving those sites to the Americans.
As U.S. soldiers did more of the fighting, they also saw less purpose to what they were doing. Troops went out on search-and-destroy missions, and then came back to their bases with little to show other than a list of enemy soldiers killed. One soldier asked, “What am I doing here? We don’t take any land.... We just mutilate bodies.” An American officer, speaking of his company’s attack on the village of Ben Tre, which was suspected of harboring NLF supporters, said, “We had to destroy the village in order to save it.” Destroying villages to “save” them, marching into the jungle, engaging in battles with enemy forces—battles that the U.S. troops almost always won—but then coming back to their bases while the enemy forces reorganized in the jungle were strategies that seemed pointless to most soldiers. The U.S. commander in Vietnam, General William Westmoreland, kept providing optimistic reports. Few were convinced.
Racial tensions often exploded in Vietnam. In 1965, 12.6 percent of the troops were black but 24 percent of combat deaths were of black soldiers. Black soldiers, who knew that civil rights workers were being killed in Alabama and Mississippi at home, believed that they were often being sent on the most dangerous missions. Many became increasingly angry at their fellow troops, at their officers, and at the war.
263
20
American Voices
Paul Thomas Coe, “Vietnam Letters,” 1969-70
263
)
I
^^aul Thomas Coe was a devout Mormon and a student at the University of California at Berkeley. In 1969, he lost his draft
deferment. These letters reflect his experience in Vietnam.
The President of the United States March 17,1969
To: PaulT. Coe
GREETINGS:
You are hereby ordered for induction into the Armed Forces of the United States, and to report to: Local Board No. 31 on April 16,1969, Wednesday at 6:00 A.M. (morning) for forwarding to an Armed Forces Induction Station.
Basic Training
I'm tired of trying to rationalize things in my mind. All my beliefs seem to form a giant paradox. There is no room in my heart to justify killing, I can't ever justify the training to kill, and yet I can't justify copping out. I can't justify desertion although that seems the only logical course of action. I know inside that a time is drawing near when our families will need to draw together and the world will be in an uproar, so leaving for another country is out. The church speaks so loudly against breaking the law, and so loudly for supporting our constituted way of life that I can't justify refusing my orders. I want to do what is called of me for my country, but I can't justify the senseless loss of life.... But with every day I become more conscious of the ominous power we've given the military, and hate it so much more....
Peace on Earth
P.T.
In Vietnam
11 September, 1970
There really isn't that much I can tell you. Rain has begun and the monsoons will be here soon.... Another thing, the chow is sorry. I mean ungood food & I'm sick of dried up burnt gristly cold roast beef, nearly every day. You'd think they'd at least learn how to cook that one thing if that's all they cook, but no not them. By the way have you taught Barb [Paul's wife] to make decent gravy yet?
Miss you Mom. Give love to all.
Paul
24 Sept. 70
Rather than go out with some battalion Recon [reconnaissance] team and sit in the rain, I joined what is called the 3rd Brigade Air Cavalry. It's an instant Recon team. They insert us into trouble spots for a day or two & then extract us... you can take anything when you know they're gonna pull you out in 2 days.
Just got back from a 3-day mission directly west of Hue about 3 ridgelines east of the A Shau Valley. We were sent in
there to investigate enemy supply routes.... Then we found that the LZ [Landing Zone] we were supposed to go to was % up the Ridge and washed out, so nobody could get up to it.
... We made it to the LZ & the Birds [helicopters] were beautiful. After circling for 10 minutes they figured how to get in, but they didn't like it either because there was high ground all around. But they came in anyway about 10 feet off the water ... so I threw my weapon in, grabbed that skid, pulled myself to a boulder and jumped in. Felt good. Let my legs dangle out the door all the way back....
Paul
***
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
08 DEC 1970
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Coe,
By this time I am sure that you have been notified of the death of your son, Paul T. Coe. I want you to know that Paul's death came as a tragic shock to me and to all the men who knew him. On behalf of the entire company, I extend our deepest and most sincere sympathy.
On 14 November 1970, Paul was a member of a daylight patrol in the vicinity of Camp Evans, with the Headquarters Reconnaissance Platoon, when the patrol hit a booby trapped area. Your son was killed by multiple fragmentation wounds when one of the hostile booby traps exploded. I hope that it may be of some comfort to you to know that Paul died instantly and did not suffer....
Sincerely,
FRANK A. LIGHTLE
Captain, Infantry
Commanding Officer
Source: Karen Manners Smith and Tim Koster, Time It Was: American Stories from the Sixties. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson), pp. 27,32,36-39.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Coe characterize the war while in basic training?
How did he view his own military service?
2.	Comparison
In what ways were Coe's letters similar to those written by soldiers in previous American wars? In what ways do they reflect the specific context and experiences of the war in Vietnam?
mi
770 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
African-American troops in Vietnam who bore a disproportional share of the fighting and dying quickly lost faith in the effort.

Ml

263
While morale disintegrated on the ground in Vietnam, public support for the war also evaporated. By launching the war quietly, Johnson had not built public support. Many Americans had a natural tendency to support the president and the troops at first, but that support declined rapidly. Vietnam was the nation’s first televised war. Television did not actually show a lot of combat; many of the battles were at night or far from cameras. Nevertheless, footage of troops going into combat as well as pictures of dead and wounded American soldiers brought the war into American living rooms. Lack of clear progress created doubt. Opposition to the war built with each news report, each draft call, and each casualty list.
While critics have rightly pointed out that no more than 20 percent of college students took part in antiwar demonstrations, and those demonstrations were mostly on elite campuses such as the University of California at Berkeley, Columbia, and Harvard, few campuses anywhere were untouched by antiwar fervor, especially as many students worried about draft calls or felt the guilt at being protected by their student status while friends went off to Vietnam. As the war escalated, those participating in campus-based teach-ins—gatherings at which experts or better informed students taught others about Vietnam—heard mostly from critics of the war. The first March on Washington to end the war took place in April 1965. At that rally, 25,000 people heard SDS president Paul Potter say, “The incredible war in Vietnam has provided the razor, the terrifyingly sharp cutting edge that has finally severed the last vestige of illusion that morality and democracy are the guiding principles of American foreign policy.” In 1966, 1967, and 1968, the teach-ins became angrier and the disaffection with the government greater. As early as 1966, demonstrators were not only calling for American withdrawal from Vietnam but also waving NLF flags and chanting, Ho, Ho Ho Chi Minh, The NLF is gonna win.”
Students were far from the only opponents of the war. The Women s Strike for Peace, the Fellowship of Reconciliation, and the Catholic Worker Movement were pacifist organizations who had opposed the war from the beginning. In addition, more religious leaders began to speak out about the specific war in Vietnam. Catholic priests Daniel and Philip Berrigan and Henry Sloan Coffin, the Protestant chaplain at Yale University, became leading antiwar activists.
Established civil rights groups did not want to risk a break with the Johnson administration when LBJ was doing so much to support civil rights. Even so, SNCC
Chapter 26
Led 771
M3
20
263
was the first among them to oppose the war. A 1966 SNCC position paper attacked a war “to preserve a ‘democracy’ which does not exist at home. In April 1967, Martin Luther King, Jr., stood in the pulpit at New York’s Riverside Church to tell the civil rights movement and the nation that he had come to see that the war was sending poor and black Americans 8,000 miles away to fight for rights that they did not have in the United States. “Somehow this madness must cease,” he pleaded.
As the war continued, some opponents took their opposition to a new level. When some 35,000 demonstrators surrounded the Pentagon and tried to disrupt daily business in Washington in October 1967, the government reacted harshly with mass arrests of the protestors. Between 50,000 and 100,000 young men left the United States, most of them moving to Canada, to avoid serving in a war they thought was wrong. Many of those who moved to Canada eventually returned to the United States, especially after presidential pardons granted by presidents Ford and Carter, but some 50,000 Americans became permanent residents of Canada as a result of the Vietnam War while others stayed in neutral nations like Sweden.
In 1967, a group of young men in San Francisco announced that they were staying in the United States but refusing to cooperate with the military draft in any way. “We will renounce all deferments and refuse to cooperate with the draft in any manner, at any level,” they said. Draft resistance, and a willingness to be arrested for the act, was a new stage in the protest movement. Later, Dr. Benjamin Spock (whose book on child care had been the bible for the parents of many of those now refusing the draft) and Rev. William Sloan Coffin were arrested for urging draft resistance.
Still others took their protests to other forms of direct action to try to stop the war. In May 1969, opponents of the war, including some religious leaders, walked into the offices of Dow Chemical Company, which made the napalm jelly that was used to burn, kill, and maim in Vietnam, and poured blood into filing cabinets and on office equipment to disrupt the workings of the offices.
While opposition to the war in Vietnam broadened, Johnson isolated himself with trusted advisers. He agonized about casualty reports, wept while signing letters of condolence to those who had lost a loved one in the war, and regularly got up at 4:00 and 5:00 a.m. to check on casualty figures. He never seriously considered changing course and stopped talking to those who suggested that he should. He authorized the CIA, which was only supposed to operate abroad, to spy on American antiwar leaders who he became convinced were communists, and he authorized the FBI to infiltrate and disrupt the antiwar movement. Johnson brought the army commander in Vietnam, General Westmoreland, to Washington, DC, in November 1967 to tell Americans that there was “light at the end of the tunnel” in Vietnam. By that time, fewer Americans were convinced.
1968
Tet Offensive
A significant North Vietnamese assault on Amer ican bases across Vietnam.
In 1968, the growing tensions of war, race, and change in America seemed to explode. Few were untouched by the anger and fear that the year provoked.
Two months after General Westmoreland’s optimistic assessment, the light at the end of the tunnel in Vietnam dimmed considerably. On January 30, 1968, the first day of Tet, the Vietnamese lunar new year, North Vietnamese and NLF forces attacked everywhere across South Vietnam, all at once. They blew a hole in the wall surrounding the American embassy in Saigon and came close to getting into the inner compound. They attacked the distant Marine post at Khe Sanh. They took control of the old Vietnamese capital city of Hue. And they attacked American and South Vietnamese forces all over the country. Eventually, the Tet Offensive was beaten back, at terrible cost to the North Vietnamese. By one estimate, the North lost 40,000 troops compared to 2,300 South Vietnamese and 1,100 Americans. Even so, the North had won an important victory. Public trust in Westmoreland and Johnson was never restored. The president and the general had said that the United States was winning the war, but now it certainly looked like it was losing. Johnson’s popularity dropped
772 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
from its already low 40 percent approval rating to 26 percent. Walter Cronkite, the anchor of the CBS Evening News and perhaps the most trusted journalist in the country, who had maintained careful neutrality in his reporting, traveled to Vietnam after Tet and returned to tell his viewers, “It seems more certain than ever that the bloody experience of Vietnam is to end in a stalemate.” Many agreed.
When Westmoreland responded to the Tet Offensive by asking for even more troops, beyond the 525,000 Americans already in Vietnam, Johnson’s new Secretary of Defense told the president, We seem to have a sinkhole.... I see more and more fighting with more and more casualties on the U.S. side and no end in sight to the action. Secretary of State Rusk, long a supporter of the war, recommended a bombing halt and an offer of negotiations with North Vietnam. Johnson hated the advice, but he could no longer ignore it.
At the same time, Johnson’s lack of popularity was catching up with him. Everyone assumed that, as an incumbent president, Johnson would seek and easily win his party’s nomination for another term in office. But the antiwar mood was growing, in the country and in the Democratic Party. On March 12,1968, in the nation’s first primary vote in New Hampshire, Minnesota Senator Eugene McCarthy, who had become a strong opponent of the war, won 42 percent of the votes against LBJ’s 49 percent. Many who had participated in antiwar demonstrations decided to be “clean for Gene” and campaign door to door in New Hampshire. They found a ready electorate, people of many different persuasions, including those who were fed up with the seemingly endless war and those who were frustrated because LBJ seemed unwilling either to commit the force needed to win or to withdraw. The New Hampshire vote was far too close for a sitting president.
Even worse than the challenge from McCarthy, at least from Johnson’s perspective, was one from New York Senator Robert Kennedy, whom Johnson loathed. Bobby Kennedy realized that McCarthy’s win could mean LBJ’s defeat for the nomination and that, since McCarthy had opened the way, it was a good time to challenge an incumbent of his own party. While McCarthy was little-known, Bobby was perhaps the best known politician in the country. Soon after the New Hampshire vote, Kennedy announced that he was entering the contest. For many who opposed the war, wanted further social change, and dreamed of a return to the glory days of the JFK presidency, Bobby’s 1968 campaign was a dream come true. His campaign struck an emotional chord among both supporters and opponents—seldom seen in American politics.
On March 31, 1968, just weeks after the New Hampshire vote, Johnson gave a nationally televised speech. He announced plans to reduce the bombing as “the first step to deescalate the conflict.” He called on Ho Chi Minh to “respond positively and favorably to this new step for peace.” Then he surprised the country, perhaps himself, by adding, “I shall not seek, and will not accept, the nomination of my party for another term as your president.” Johnson, the ultimate politician, knew that public trust was essential to govern. And by March 1968, he had lost that trust. North Vietnam did respond, and the road to peace had begun. It would be a long and painful road, however, one that would last far beyond the end of Johnson’s term. Johnson s career and his hopes for the country had become casualties of Vietnam—though very far from the only casualties.
Four days after Johnson’s surprise announcement, Martin Luther King, Jr., was shot and killed in Memphis, Tennessee, where he was supporting a strike by the city’s garbage collectors. With the murder of King, the leading spokesperson for nonviolence, many felt that the cause of nonviolence itself had been damaged. Riots erupted all over America. Police arrested 20,000 people in 130 cities in the week following King’s assassination. Forty-six people, 41 of them black, were killed. Urban America seemed to be coming unglued.
The riots that followed King’s death reflected the deep anger in much of the African-American community. In Oakland, California, Huey Newton and Bobby Seale had founded the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense in 1966. Newton and Seale insisted that urban police forces had become occupying armies in the black community. Following a
Black Panther Party founders Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale. The Panthers advocated a radical economic, social, and educational agenda that made it the target of a determined campaign of suppression and elimination by the police and the FBI.
California law then in place allowing unconcealed weapons, the Panthers conducted their own armed patrols of Oakland as a defense. Such an armed presence, however, almost assured violence. A 17-year-old Panther, Bobby Hutton, was killed the same month as King. Many more Panthers would be killed in subsequent years. The Panthers always remained a tiny fringe group, as popular for swagger as for their breakfast programs and their commitment to armed self-defense. Even so, while small, they were a symbol that many blacks embraced—a move away from the self-sacrificing nonviolence of King to a more angry and militant stance.
Two weeks after King’s death and the urban riots, students at Columbia University, led by the SDS chapter, took over the president’s office and refused to leave. Four buildings were held by white students and a fifth building, separately, by black students. The Columbia sit-in was a protest over the university’s war-related research and a university plan to build a new gymnasium in the park that separated the university from Harlem. In addition, it reflected far-reaching anger toward all authorities. After 8 days, the university administration called on the police to clear the buildings and they did. The violence of the police move onto the campus—during which more than a hundred demonstrators were injured—also pointed to the deep fault lines in the nation. The mostly working-class white police were furious at the white students whom they considered privileged snobs. The student revolt at Columbia was one of many. Students protesting the
war or local issues took over buildings, held mass rallies, disrupted classes, and burned war-related research materials on more than 150 campuses in the 1968-69 academic year.
In the face of this violent, some said crazy, time in American history, Bobby Kennedy continued his campaign for the presidency. On June 5, Kennedy won the California Democratic Primary. It was the capstone to his campaign. He not only championed the antiwar cause, but befriended Cesar Chavez of the Farm Workers Union, rural whites in Appalachia, Puerto Rican immigrants living in New York City, American Indians on isolated reservations, and urban blacks in city after city, as no candidate had ever done. Then, only moments after his California victory speech, Kennedy was shot by an Arab nationalist. He died days later. As with King, many hopes died with Kennedy.
When the Democratic Party convention finally took place in Chicago in August 1968, Kennedy was dead. The McCarthy campaign had been sidelined. The party nominated Hubert Humphrey, LBJ’s loyal vice president who had not entered a single primary. Humphrey had long been a darling of the liberal wing of the party, but his silence on Vietnam and his steadfast loyalty to the increasingly unpopular Johnson meant that he had lost the trust of many.
While the convention met to hear speeches and act on the nomination, protests erupted inside and outside the convention hall. Many delegates protested on the floor of the convention itself. Huge demonstrations were also planned for Chicago during convention week by demonstrators who had their own divisions. One faction, led by long-time pacifist David Dellinger, wanted a nonviolent but militant protest against the war, LBJ, and Humphrey. Another group, for whom Tom Hayden and Rennie Davis of the SDS were the most prominent, wanted a more direct confrontation that they knew might provoke police violence. Finally, a group who called themselves Yippies, led by Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin, believed that the best way to protest was to make fun of the Democrats and the Chicago police in every way possible.
Chicago s mayor Richard Daley was determined to quash all demonstrations. As the convention met, the police attacked the demonstrators with tear gas and billy clubs in the glare of television cameras. They attacked delegates. They attacked the press. Nationally known reporters
774 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Dan Rather and Mike Wallace were both roughed up. As crowds chanted, “The whole world is watching,” the violence in Chicago was broadcast around the world. One McCarthy delegate described what he saw from his hotel window, “Cops chased kids off into the park and out of sight among the trees, emerged with one cop dragging a boy or girl by the leg and another cop running alongside clubbing in the groin. A man tried to carry a bleeding woman into the hotel, and they were both clubbed and thrown into the wagon.”
In the aftermath of the convention, a commission appointed to investigate what had happened described it as a “police riot.” The fact that this could happen, with “the whole world watching,” represented how deeply divided Americans were in 1968.
The November 1968 presidential election presented three choices. First was Hubert Humphrey and his vice presidential nominee, Maine Senator Edmund Muskie, a ticket that barely seemed to limp out of the Chicago convention. Humphrey said later,' broken, battered, and beaten.”
Chapter	Changed 7‘
In what was later termed a "police riot" by an investigating commission, Chicago police officers attacked and beat demonstrators at the 1968 Democratic Party convention.
“My wife and I went home heart -But there were two other contenders in the 1968 race.
In addition, Governor George Wallace of Alabama, who had made his name blocking school integration had launched a strong third-party campaign in 1968. To the surprise of many, he qualified for the ballot in all 50 states. Wallace and his running mate, Air Force General Curtis LeMay, seemed to have broad support, ranging from the most conservative groups in the country—including the KKK and the John Birch Society—to the many white southerners opposed to racial integration to many in the North who were appalled by riots and antiwar demonstrations. With comments like, “If any demonstrator every lays down in front of my car, it’ll be the last car he’ll every lay down in front of,” Wallace courted what he called the “law and order” vote.
Third, the Republican Party emerged from its summer convention as united as the Democrats were divided. Richard M. Nixon, who had lost to John Kennedy in 1960, spent the intervening 8 years quietly laying the ground work for a political comeback. He collected many political debts and cashed them all in to win the 1968 nomination on the first ballot. His running mate was Maryland Governor Spiro Agnew, who had once been seen as a liberal but who, especially after the Baltimore riots following King’s death, had become a voice of white backlash against what he called the “circuit-riding, Hanoi-visiting, caterwauling, riot-inciting, burn-America-down” types in the black and white community. Nixon announced a “secret plan” to end the war in Vietnam and otherwise ran a carefully scripted, television-sawy, and very expensive campaign. The Republicans outspent the Democrats almost two to one.
In early fall, it seemed as if Nixon was unstoppable, in spite of Wallace s popularity. Nixon’s major theme “Working Americans have become the forgotten Americans,” his promise to do something different in Vietnam (no one knew what), and his success in representing anti-Johnson sentiment without getting specific all worked in his favor. An early poll gave him 43 percent of the vote to Humphrey’s 28 percent and Wallace’s 21 percent. Humphrey, however, ran a surprisingly strong campaign. He tried to repair the Democratic coalition, distanced himself from Johnson, and reached out to his longtime supporters. At the same time, Nixon struck some as too smooth, and a vote for Wallace seemed a wasted vote. By election day, the polls said the race between Humphrey and Nixon was too close to call.
Nixon won the November election, by a close vote of 37.7 million to 37.1 million, while Wallace took almost 10 million votes. Nixon’s electoral college lead was greater: 301 to 191 The Democrats retained both houses of Congress, however. Humphrey
won 97 percent of the black vote but only 35 percent of the white vote. Between them, Nixon and Wallace had won 57 percent of all of the votes, a significant backlash against Johnson’s huge 1964 victory, against the war, and against the demonstrators who opposed it. In 1968, Americans were more deeply divided by race and class and region than they had been in many years, and anything approaching national consensus was a distant dream. The election results also showed that Vietnam would remain an unsolved issue for a new administration.
263
Quick Review How did the war in Vietnam impact Great Society programs, the Johnson presidency, and the country?
CONCLUSION
In contrast to the 1950s, which represented a time of relative stability and complacency for some Americans, the 1960s ushered in a period of intense activism and social upheaval that in one way or another touched most. Writers and artists began to criticize almost all aspects of American culture and helped set in motion the modern ecological conservation movement, the feminist movement, a new focus on poverty, and a vocal antiwar movement. Perhaps the most iconic of these movements was the student movement. In 1960, a small group of students formed Students for a Democratic Society, which sought to end war, racial injustice, and economic inequality. In its early years, members of that organization engaged in marches, protests, and other forms of direct action to counter government policies inconsistent with their stated mission.
Despite increasing social activism across the nation, President John F. Kennedy remained concerned more with foreign than domestic issues. President Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline Kennedy brought youth, charm, and energy to the White House. Although Kennedy achieved some domestic victories, he was preoccupied, to a large extent, with Cuba, Germany—especially Berlin—and the Soviet Union. After the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Cuban ties to Russia grew. The Soviets sent military personnel to the Caribbean island, and in 1962, the Russians began building bases in Cuba for housing missiles capable of reaching the United States. A clash between the United States and the Soviet Union seemed inevitable, but the two nations reached an agreement that resolved the crisis and thereby avoided a potentially cataclysmic confrontation.
In November 1963, Kennedy was assassinated and Lyndon Johnson became president. Unlike his predecessor, Johnson attempted to focus more on domestic rather than on foreign policy issues and, in fact, was remarkably successful in advancing his domestic policy goals, which he called the Great Society. During his tenure, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, a new immigration law, and the Voting Rights Act, as well as created Medicare and Medicaid health insurance and greatly expanded federal aid to education and the poor. Still, Vietnam was a lingering problem. As Johnson steadily increased U.S. involvement in Vietnam, opposition to the war intensified at home.
In 1968, mounting tensions in American society exploded. In the midst of the violence, at home and abroad, Johnson announced that he would not seek another term as president. Four days afterward, Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated and race riots broke out across the country. Two months later, Robert Kennedy was shot and killed. At the 1968 Democratic Party convention, protests erupted outside the convention hall, and the police attacked demonstrators as well as onlookers in what was later called a “police riot.” While the Democratic Party was fracturing, the Republican Party seemed strong. Nevertheless, the presidential race of 1968 was a very close one. The tumultuous year ended with the election of Republican candidate Richard Nixon to the presidency.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
The 1960s have been seen as a decade of protests. What evidence would you give for or against that assumption? How did the focus and tone of protests change from the early to the late 1960s?
776 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Chapter 26 Chapter Review
26.1
NEW VOICES, NEW AUTHORITIES
____________ Explain the growing social protest in books, films, and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
Review Questions
1.	Crafting an Argument
What might explain the dramatic impact in the 1960s of books like Michael Harrington’s The Other America! Why did similar books published in the 1950s have less influence?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What changes in American society were reflected in popular film and music in the 1960s? In what ways did popular entertainment also reflect social and cultural continuity?
3.	Cause and Effect
How did the growth of American colleges and universities contribute to the emergence of the student protest movements of the 1960s?
CAMELOT, THE WHITE HOUSE, AND DALLAS—THE KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION___________________________________
Analyze the successes and failures of the Kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the United States.
Review Questions
4.	Crafting an Argument
How would you explain the paucity of Kennedy’s domestic accomplishments? In your opinion, why does he enjoy a much better reputation today than his record would seem to support?
26.2
26.3
5.	Contextualization
What goals and assumptions shaped Kennedy’s foreign policy?
6.	Historical Interpretation
What does the public response to the Supreme Court’s rulings in Abington School Board v. Schempp and Engel v. Vitale tell us about the society and culture of the United States in the 1960s?
THE COMING OF LYNDON B. JOHNSON
__________________________ Analyze the successes and failures of the Johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office—the launching of the Great Society programs and the war in Vietnam.
Review Questions
7.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Johnson and Kennedy’s domestic policy agendas. How would you explain the differences you note?
8.	Cause and Effect
What impact did developments in the war in Vietnam have on domestic politics in the United States during the 1960s?
9.	Historical Interpretation
What divisions in American society were revealed by the events of 1968?
Chapter 26 Lm
Led
27.1
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding about the mix of liberalism and conservatism that emerged after 1968.
THE NEW POLITICS OF THE LATE
1960s Explain Nixon's policies and politics, domestic and international.
THE MOVEMENTS OF THE
1960s AND 1970s 27.2
Analyze the many political and cultural movements that followed in the track of the Civil Rights Movement.
THE CULTURE WARS OF THE
1970s 273
Analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
POLITICS, ECONOMICS, AND THE IMPACT OF WATERGATE
27.4
Explain the political impact of Watergate and subsequent developments that set the stage for the "Reagan Revolution."
Widely diverse groups of American began to protest conditions and policies that they found intolerable. Among them, members of the American Indian Movement took over the closed prison on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay, claiming it as "surplus federal land" that rightly belonged to them.
Basic contradictions in American life came to the surface between 1968 and 1980. The new Republican president, elected thanks to a backlash against the unresolved war in Vietnam, initially widened the war. Nixon, elected with conservative support, also began a new era of relations with Communist China and signed some of the most far-reaching social legislation in history. While the civil rights and antiwar movements splintered, more Americans began demanding their rights in other areas. A womens movement transformed intimate relationships, the work world, and American culture. The civil rights campaigns of Latinos, Asians, American Indians, gay men, and lesbians also made their impact.
Public discourse became more divisive and angry after 1969. The new vice president, Spiro T. Agnew, called protesters “nattering nabobs of negativism.” A new conservative ideology emerged, built on Barry Goldwater’s campaigns but also on cultural issues, which included opposition to the Equal Rights Amendment and the growth of a new “religious right.” Before the decade was over, the United States was defeated in Vietnam; Richard Nixon had resigned in disgrace; his appointed successor, Gerald Ford, was defeated in his bid for reelection; and his successor Jimmy Carter was also defeated in his reelection attempt. The decade was one that held much anger, much sordidness, and few moments of greatness.
778 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
THE NEW POLITICS OF THE LATE
1960s 27.1
Explain Nixons policies and politics, domestic and international.
Significant Dates
— -.......... . -
Early in 1969, Kevin Phillips, a special assistant during Richard Nixon’s successful presidential campaign, published The Emerging Republican Majority. Phillips analyzed what he saw as the significance of the election and focused on two major changes in American politics. The new Republican Party, Phillips said, was based in “the rising insurgency of the South, the West, the New York City Irish, and middle-class suburbia. Phillips offered a detailed statistical analysis to show that the suburbs especially were overwhelmingly middle class, white, and Republican.
The elections, as Phillips described them, were a reaction against the Civil Rights Movement, which had generated considerable anger in white America and a repudiation of Johnson s Great Society. Expanded government programs and services offended people who wanted small government, who distrusted an intrusive state, and who feared racial integration.
Many found the analysis convincing even though Phillips did not assess the impact that the war in Vietnam had on the politics of 1968. Even so, many, including Lyndon Johnson, attributed the 1968 Democratic presidential losses to the war. While antiwar protesters were furious at Johnson and the Democrats for continuing the war, many other Americans were angry that the war was not being won. Anger at antiwar dissidents also ran deep. For a substantial number of Americans, celebrations of freedom from restraint—political, cultural, and sexual—were abhorrent.
The Roots of the Conservative Reaction of the 1960s
While the suburban-based conservatism was new, it was deeply rooted in the early development of suburban culture. Some Americans had long disagreed with the direction of the country. William F. Buckley’s conservative journal, the National Review appeared in 1955. Ayn Rand’s novel Atlas Shrugged appeared in 1957, the themes of which argued that any interference with individual rights would destroy human freedom. Ministers such as James Fifield at the First Congregational Church in Los Angeles preached that, “The blessings of capitalism come from God.”
As late as 1960, there were plenty of conservatives and liberals in both parties. After the 1960 election, however, the two parties began to move in opposite directions, and over time, most liberals moved to the Democratic party while most conservatives became Republicans. The drift toward fairly rigid and uniform positions in each party was clear by the late 1960s. In the 1960s and 1970s, the conservative shift among Republicans was led by Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater, who emerged as the hero of the conservative wing of the Republicans. In his first Senate campaign in 1952, Goldwater asked audiences, “Do you believe in expanding federal government?...Do you want federal bureaus and federal agencies to take over an ever-increasing portion of your life?” If the answer was “no,” then, Goldwater said, he was their man. In 1960, he criticized Eisenhower as representing a dime store New Deal. He criticized the U.S. Supreme Court’s Brown v. Board of Education decision as an unconstitutional federal intervention in the rights of states, and he voted against the 1964 Civil Rights Act, saying that the race relations issue “is best handled by the people directly concerned.” His book, The Conscience of a Conservative, published in April 1960, spoke to a white middle class that was unhappy with taxes and government intrusion, no longer interested in the New Deal safety net, frightened by the Civil Rights Movement, and fiercely anticommunist. It was this conservative movement that took over the Republican Party in 1964, even though their hero went down to defeat.
Four years later in 1968, it was Goldwater’s philosophy, not Eisenhower’s, that Richard Nixon used to make his comeback. Nevertheless, Nixon’s actual presidency
1969	Nixon inaugurated as president	HHHI
Stonewall Inn riot	j
Neil Armstrong becomes the first person	>
to walk on the moon	;	_ j
Woodstock, New York, Music and Art Fair	\	:
\ "i ’f	! !
Moratorium, largest antiwar	\
demonstration in U.S. history	______....... . i
v.... • ' ' '
1970	First Earth Day celebration;
46 women employees sue Newsweek
U.S. invasion of Cambodia; Kent State and Jackson State demonstrations
1972	First issue of Ms. magazine Nixon visit to China
Nixon signs Title IX banning sex discrimination in higher education Watergate break in
Congress sends Equal Rights Amendment to the states
Phyllis Schlafly launches STOP ERA Nixon defeats McGovern for president
1973	Last U.S. combat troops leave Vietnam
Supreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision
American Indian Movement occupies Wounded Knee
Vice President Spiro Agnew resigns; replaced by Gerald Ford
1974	Richard Nixon resigns, Gerald Ford becomes president
1975	Communist forces occupy Saigon, Vietnam war ends
1976	Carter defeats Ford in presidential election
1978	Camp David peace talks lead to Camp David Accords
United States normalizes diplomatic ties with China
1979	Shah leaves Iran, Ayatollah Khomeini returns
Three Mile Island nuclear accident American hostages taken in Iran Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
1980	Unsuccessful U.S. attempt to rescue hostages in Iran
Ronald Reagan defeats Carter for election as president
Chapter 27 Rights, ReaflM
Limits 779
27.1
contradicted his campaign assertions. Richard Nixon himself was a jumble of insecurities and contradictions. His insecurities and his sense that there were many enemies about to attack him made it hard for Nixon to build warm personal relationships or inspire the broad popularity of presidents like Eisenhower or Kennedy. He isolated himself and often lied to hide the inner workings of his administration. Even though he had been elected as the voice of those who had supported Goldwater, his administration would be relatively liberal. Many federal programs were still popular, and Nixon was happy to support them and reap the political benefit even as he attacked liberals and liberalism as a way to win yet other voters to his side.
Nixon Domestic Policies—Liberal Legislation, Conservative Politics
Although a self-proclaimed conservative, Nixon seemed to some to be a liberal in disguise. In July 1969, Nixon led the celebrations when John F. Kennedys goal was achieved and Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the moon, propelled there by American technology. In spite of the revulsion against LBJ, the 1968 election retained many Great Society Democrats in Congress. Congressional Democrats and the Republican president worked together to pass significant legislation. Johnsons 1965 Voting Rights Act was renewed in 1970. New federal funds were provided for a “war on cancer” and other medical research. Offended when she heard a group of school superintendents dismiss the educational needs of girls, Representative Edith Green of Oregon, joined by Representatives Patsy Mink of Hawaii and Shirley Chisholm of New York, proposed Title IX, which was added to the Civil Rights Act in 1972, banning sex discrimination in higher education—in sports but also in all college and university activities, and Nixon signed the law. Funds for Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security were increased. Federal affirmative action regulations were toughened by Nixons Department of Labor.
Nixon did much more than any of his predecessors to strengthen environmental protection. While the Kennedy and Johnson administrations had pressed passage of the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, and Endangered Species Act, it was under Nixon that the new cabinet-level Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was created as well as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). The 1973 Endangered Species Act expanded protection for animals and plants. New Clean Air and Clean Water acts mandated the cleanup of polluted areas without regard to the cost.
Nixon also approved government support of arts and culture, particularly regional art programs and folk art. When Nixon took office, the annual budget of the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) was $7.7 million. Many worried that Nixon, who had never shown any appreciation of art, would cut the budget, but he proposed increases each year. By the time he left office, the NEA budget was over $60 million, almost a 10-fold increase.
Nixon championed the Family Assistance Plan (FAP) that was designed by Daniel Moynihan—then a Nixon policy adviser and later a Democratic senator. It would have replaced Aid to Families with Dependent Children (known simply as “welfare” to most) with a guaranteed annual income. FAP was defeated by a combination of liberals who thought it did not provide enough money to people in poverty, and by conservatives who thought it expanded government handouts. Nixon also proposed a system of federally mandated health insurance, the only Republican to do so. Overall federal spending for people in poverty rose by some 50 percent, and total federal spending for social insurance (which always includes more middle-class than poor beneficiaries) rose from $27.3 billion in the year Nixon took office to $64.7 billion at the time of his second inauguration.
It is impossible to call anyone who presided over such spending a conservative. Nixon could be seen as the last of the New Deal presidents, and many Goldwater conservatives saw him that way and were furious with him. From Nixon’s perspective, the programs were popular, he basked in the praise for what he was doing, and he remained confident that the Goldwater conservatives were certainly not going to desert the Republican Party for the Democrats.
780 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
However, Nixon was an unusually ruthless “win-at-all-costs” politician more than he was either a liberal or conservative. If a policy like increasing Social Security benefits or launching the EPA brought him votes, he was all for it. If fanning the flames of divisiveness brought more votes, Nixon fostered division. He encouraged Vice President Agnew s attacks on protestors and experts. Nixon himself condemned protestors as the vicious and lawless elements in our society.”
In planning his reelection campaign, Nixon and his campaign manager, former Attorney General John Mitchell, developed a “southern strategy” to win over Wallace voters. The administration slowed enforcement of federal guidelines for school desegregation and courted segregationist politicians. When officials in the Justice Department sought to enforce desegregation rules, Nixon wrote to John Ehrlichman, his closest aide, Do what the law requires and not one bit more” He approved a plan that would involve the CIA and FBI in illegal bugging and wiretapping. He maintained a “Freeze List of those who must never be invited to the White House and a larger “Enemies List, including reporters, politicians, and others, who should be watched regularly.

27.1
!’f

International Issues—Vietnam, China, and Beyond
Before he left office, LBJ had reduced the bombing of North Vietnam and begun the Paris Peace Talks. Even so, the war itself dragged on. In his presidential campaign, Nixon had promised a “secret plan” to end the war, but the end would still be a long time coming. Nixon and his National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger had a habit of bypassing the State Department and sometimes even their own staff. In Vietnam and other foreign policy arenas, the Nixon-Kissinger policies were the closely guarded work of these two men.
Paris Peace Talks
Talks with North Vietnam that led to an agreement by the Nixon administration to with draw all U.S. troops from Vietnam in 1972.
THE CONTINUING SAGA OF VIETNAM
In the first months of the Nixon-Kissinger tenure, the Paris Peace Talks went nowhere. Nixon expanded the bombing of North Vietnam and started bombing supply routes and North Vietnamese enclaves in neutral Cambodia. In the next 4 years, from early 1969 until the bombing ended in December 1972, more U.S. bombs were dropped on Cambodia than were dropped by the United States during World War II. The expanded bombing did nothing to break the will of the North Vietnamese leadership, though damage and civilian casualties were high. The bombing of Cambodia took a higher toll. A year after the bombing began, Cambodia’s prime minister, Lon Nol, overthrew the chief of state, Prince Sihanouk. From his exile in China, Sihanouk then urged Cambodians to join the anti-American communist resistance, the Khmer Rouge. The result was a devastating civil war in heretofore relatively peaceful Cambodia. When the Khmer Rouge—a very different communist insurgency from that in Vietnam-defeated the Lon Nol government, they launched a decade of horror in which they tried to turn the clock back to “Year Zero” and make Cambodia a preindustrial state. In the process, they killed teachers or anyone showing signs of American, Vietnamese, or western education or influence. Perhaps a quarter of all Cambodians died, and many who survived had then to live through years of 14-hour work days and constant hunger. Ironically the horror of the Khmer Rouge rule in Cambodia ended only when Vietnam invaded the country in 1978.
While Nixon and Kissinger expanded the bombing, they sought to withdraw American ground troops from Vietnam. It was, after all, sending young Americans to Vietnam that was fueling most of the resistance to the war. In May 1969, the administration announced plans to change the draft regulations so a new lottery system would give young men a better sense of the odds of their being called while reducing the overall size of the call-up “pool.” Eventually, the Nixon administration moved from a draft to an all-volunteer army to reduce public resistance to Vietnam and future wars.
The administration’s new policy was called Vietnamization. Money and arms would be sent to the South Vietnamese government so more and better trained Vietnamese troops might replace American troops. In 1969, the South Vietnamese army expanded from 850,000 to 1,000,000 troops while the first 25,000 U.S. troops
ind Limits 781
were withdrawn. In the years that followed, fewer and fewer American troops were stationed in Vietnam. However, the people of South Vietnam had never embraced the war with the enthusiasm that either the South Vietnamese or American governments wanted, so it was difficult for the South Vietnamese government to rely on their loyalty.
Maintaining the morale of the U.S. troops who remained in Vietnam was very difficult. The war seemed to have no purpose. Those on leave sometimes refused to return. Desertions spiked as soldiers sought asylum in Canada or Sweden. In Vietnam, there were near-mutinies as soldiers refused to fight for strategic positions that seemed to have no value; “fragging” of officers—sometimes lethal attacks on officers by enlisted men—increased dramatically with over 1,000 reported between 1969 and 1972. Racial tensions among the troops escalated. Drug use increased. By one estimate, 40,000 of the 250,000 troops remaining in Vietnam in 1971 were using heroin. Protests against the war mounted within the army itself.
After 1968, protests against the war were larger and angrier than ever. In the fall of 1969, 600,000 to 750,000 people gathered on the Washington Mall to protest the war. When Nixon confirmed that U.S. troops had invaded Cambodia in April 1970, protests took place on 350 college campuses around the country. A quarter of all the nation’s college students may have been involved. On May 4, Ohio National Guard troops opened fire at protesters at Kent State University, killing four. Two days later, local police killed two protesting students at historically black Jackson State College in Mississippi. In April 1971, 1,000 veterans of the war camped out in Washington to protest the war while they read the names of dead buddies and flung medals on the Capitol steps. One of the veterans, 27-year-old John Kerry—a future senator and presidential candidate—testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. He asked, “How do you ask a man to be the last man to die for a mistake?”
President Nixon insisted that the protests made no impact on him. When students from a number of universities gathered in May 1970 to remember the four who died at Kent State, construction workers jumped into the crowd, hitting the students with
I I
it. f discerns,b«,t.ha,w.,w=,e teading Amehcana shoo, and ’ „ „„ ’ Am’

782
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
their hard hats. A few days later, officials of the construction unions presented Nixon with an honorary hard hat which he accepted as a “symbol, along with our great flag, for freedom and patriotism to our beloved country.” A Newsweek poll reported that 58 percent of Americans blamed the Kent State students for the violence, only 11 percent the National Guard. The same poll showed that 50 percent of Americans approved of the invasion of Cambodia while 39 percent opposed it. The anger swirling around the war took many forms, not only protests against the war, but also anger at the protesters and anger at two presidential administrations, as much for the failure to expand the war as for making war in the first place.
Then, as the 1972 presidential election approached, the United States and North Vietnam, meeting at the so-far unproductive Paris Peace talks, agreed to a compromise. Henry Kissinger, in private meetings with the North Vietnamese negotiators, agreed that North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam could remain there pending a final resolution. Le Due Tho, the North Vietnamese negotiator at the talks, agreed that the South Vietnamese Thieu government could stay in place pending the resolution and that American prisoners of war—mostly bomber pilots, some of whom had been held for years—would be returned. On October 31, 1972, Kissinger announced “Peace is at hand.” It turned out to be a premature announcement. South Vietnamese President Thieu, who had not been informed of the changing U.S. position, objected to the continued presence of northern troops, and after Nixon had won a second term on November 7, he backed Thieu. The war continued.
In December 1972, after his reelection, Nixon expanded the bombing of the North. More bombs were dropped in the 12-day “Christmas bombing” than in the previous 3 years. In January 1973, peace talks led back to the same agreement as had been considered in October, in spite of Thieu’s continuing skepticism. On January 27, 1973, a cease-fire took effect; U.S. combat troops soon left the country. American prisoners of war were returned and went home. The direct U.S. involvement in Vietnam was over. The United States continued to provide aid for the Thieu government, kept advisers in South Vietnam, and bombed supply routes in Cambodia. But without U.S. fighting forces, the South Vietnamese government lost ground and would lose more ground in the years ahead.
CHINA
While the war to stop a communist victory in Vietnam continued, Nixon, in perhaps the most surprising move of his administration, began to normalize U.S. relations with communist China. Ever since the communist victory in 1949, the Peoples Republic of China and the United States had remained deeply hostile to each other. Ihe United States continued to recognize the Chinese government-in-exile on the island of Taiwan as the official government of China, in spite of the fact that the communist government based in Beijing ruled the land. Then in July 1971, National Security Adviser Kissinger made a secret trip to China and laid the groundwork for a highly publicized trip by President Nixon to China in February 1972. Nixons every move was televised, including his handshake with Chairman Mao Zedong, his toasts with Premier Zhou En-lai, and his tour of the Great Wall. The trip had a number of substantive benefits for all concerned. From Nixon’s perspective he got a promise that China would not intervene in Vietnam. China got a promise of a smaller U.S. military presence in Taiwan. Both countries established new diplomatic channels and expanded trade and travel opportunities. For China, the trip also meant an end to decades of isolation, and for Nixon, it was a publications boost at the beginning of an election year. Long after the trip, Nixon said, This was the week that changed the world.. .a bridge across 16,000 miles and 22 years of hostilities.” In a tense world, it certainly began a new era of cooperation and coexistence.
EXPANDED FOREIGN DEALINGS
While Nixon’s trip to China received the most publicity, U.S. dealings with the Soviet Union may have been more substantive. In September 1970, Nixon and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev came to an agreement about Cuba. While the Soviet Union continued to provide Cuba with aid and the 27.1
President Richard Nixon, who had made his reputation as a staunch anticommunist, ended years of hostility between the United States and communist China with his February 1972 trip.
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (known as SALT I) and an Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM)
Major treaties negotiated with the Soviet Union to reduce the world's supply of nuclear weapons.
United States continued its embargo on trade with the island, relations thawed considerably when the Soviets agreed to suspend building a submarine base there and the United States promised there would not be another invasion of the island.
A year later, the United States and Soviet leaders reduced tensions in Berlin. In May 1972, Nixon traveled to Moscow for a meeting with Brezhnev in which they agreed to a Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (known as SALT I) and an Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (ABM) that began the process of reducing the world’s supply of nuclear weapons.
Other elements in the Nixon-Kissinger foreign policy were less successful. The Six-Day War in the Middle East had taken place in June 1967, a year and a half before Nixon’s election, but the new administration had to deal with the outcome. In a deceptive move, using American-supplied weapons but keeping the Americans in the dark about their intentions, Israel attacked Egypt and Syria. The Egyptian army was devastated, and Israeli troops came close to overthrowing the government of Syria until stopped by the United States at the insistence of the Soviets, who used the hotline between Washington and Moscow for the first time. Israel seized 42,000 square miles and tripled its size.
Nixon supported friendly Arab governments, especially the then “twin pillars” of Saudi Arabia and Iran. Nixon was delighted that with their oil money—much of it U.S.-supplied through massive oil purchases—Saudi Arabia and Iran could also handle their own defense and purchase American arms. When a crisis emerged in Jordan in the summer of 1970, Israel and the United States jointly defended a friendly government there. But real peace in the Middle East remained elusive.
Nixon and Kissinger sought to project American influence in other parts of the world with mixed results. They disliked India’s Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and believed that India was intent on an alliance with the Soviet Union. Although Gandhi could be difficult and Indian links to the Soviet Union were real, the long-term result was a U.S. policy to strengthen ties to a military dictatorship in Pakistan. The alliance led the United States to support that government when it tried to put down a rebellion in the Bengali region that cost perhaps a million lives. It would be a long time before Indian or Bengali people warmed to the United States.
784 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
In Chile, the United States tried hard to keep a Marxist Salvadore Allende from winning the 1970 election. When he did win, the CIA kept trying to destabilize the Allende government. The efforts worked, and Allende was overthrown and killed in a military coup in 1973. The U.S.-backed military forces that overthrew the democratically elected government launched Chile on a course of years of tyranny and terror.
Finally in August 1971, almost 3 decades after the World War II leaders, meeting at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, had made the U.S. dollar the currency against which all other would be pegged as a way to stabilize exchange rates (see Chapter 24), Nixon announced a New Economic Policy” and ended that practice. In the future, the dollar would float freely in relationship to other international currencies. Nixon hoped that by cutting the dollar loose from other currencies, the new exchange rates would make it easier for people in other countries to buy U.S. goods. He wanted to bolster the economy before the 1972 election, and the economy received a valuable jolt. The long-term result of ending the stability in international exchange rates was less certain.
27J
New Economic Policy
A policy that ended the decades long plan in which all other currencies would be based on the U.S. dollar.
Quick Review Nixon's policy has been described as liberalism at home and a tough Cold War stance abroad. Explain why you would agree or disagree with this position.
THE MOVEMENTS OF THE
1960s AND 1970s Analyze the many political and cultural movements that followed in the track of the Civil Rights Movement.
The Civil Rights Movement had captivated the country’s attention in the 1950s and 1960s, but it was not until the late 1960s and 1970s that many other groups of Americans formed their own movements to demand new rights and freedoms. Women, Latinos, American Indians, and members of the white counterculture all formed their own organizations, made their own demands, and pushed the society to acknowledge their concerns between 1968 and 1980.
The Women's Movement
Through the 1960s, the place of women in society remained surprisingly unchanged and unconsidered. Newspapers still ran separate listings for male and female jobs. Only a token number of women were admitted to law, medical, or other professional schools. Husbands still had to sign off on a wife’s credit card application. In November 1964, Stokely Carmichael made his infamous comment, “The position of women in SNCC is prone.” Women who went to Mississippi to fight for civil rights ended up doing domestic chores as well as organizing, and women in the antiwar movement found it very difficult to be seen as credible leaders. Women started to see the reality of their circumstances, and they did not like what they saw.
Women also began running for office in larger numbers than ever before. Only a tiny number of women served in state legislatures or Congress before the late 1960s. Nevertheless, during the 1960s, momentum grew as more women, and a more diverse group of women, started running for and winning elections. More women were elected to Congress, including Patsy Mink (D-Hawaii) in 1965, the first Asian woman; and Shirley Chisholm (D-New York) the first African-American woman in 1969. In 1971, Chisholm, Mink, Bella Abzug, and other women in elective and appointed offices created the National Women’s Political Caucus (NWPC), a bipartisan organization to encourage women to seek office. In 1972, Chisholm also ran for president and carried 151 delegates in the Democratic National Convention. In 1975, Ella Grasso was elected governor of Connecticut, the first woman to be elected a state governor who was not following her husband.
Chapter 27 Rights,
iion, and Limits 785
In the 1970s, many different groups of women came together to protest inequality, raise consciousness, and change the ways men and women interacted in American society.
At the end of the 1960s, some younger women began consciousness-raising groups, discussing their experiences as women as well as the emotional, political, and economic toll that sexism was taking in their lives. Like the students who founded SNCC, these younger women had far less patience with working “inside the system than their elders. Some began to separate from larger organizations and political movements while others also separated from the men with whom they were previously aligned politically or personally.
A month after the violent demonstrations at the Democratic Convention in Chicago in 1968, Robin Morgan began organizing women to disrupt the Miss America Pageant in Atlantic City, New Jersey. The pageant was very popular in the 1950s and 1960s. Women representing each state were judged for their beauty and poise. “Miss America was perfect for us lefty Women’s liberationists,” Morgan insisted, “She touched capitalism, militarism, racism, and sexism, all in one fell swoop.” Women who came to Atlantic City had a “Freedom Trash Can” in which they threw underwire bras, constricting girdles, copies of Playboy magazine, and other symbols of women’s oppression. When the New York Post carried the story, the editors wanted to make a comparison to draft card burning, and erroneously coined the term “bra burning,” though as far as anyone knows, no bras were burned in Atlantic City or at any other women’s event.
A short time later, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance at the Department of Labor supported Bernice “Bunny” Sandler when she filed a complaint against the University of Maryland after she had been turned down for a faculty appointment because, she was told, “Let’s face
it, Bunny, you come on too strong for a woman.” Sandler decided to challenge the decision. The case eventually became a nationwide class action suit against university discrimination.
In August 1970, moderate and radical feminists came together to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the women’s suffrage amendment. On Women’s Strike for Equality Day, fifty-thousand 50,000 women marched down New York’s Fifth Avenue, including Congresswoman Bella Abzug, National Organization for Women founder Betty Friedan, and newer leaders such as Gloria Steinem and Kate Millett.
Joining Friedan and Pauli Murray, the co-founders of NOW, younger women like Kate Millett, Germaine Greer, and Gloria Steinem began their activist careers at the end of the 1960s, bringing the issues of women’s struggles and women’s rights to the foreground. In 1970, Florence Howe founded the Feminist Press to reissue the work of earlier feminist writers and publish the work of new women authors. In Massachusetts, 12 women founded the Boston Women’s Health Book Collective and published a small booklet, Women and Their Bodies, in 1970. An expanded version, Our Bodies, Ourselves, became a best seller. A group of African-American feminists calling themselves the Combahee River Collective—in honor of a Civil War battle led by Harriet Tubman—issued a statement in 1977, saying, “Black, other Third World, and working women have been involved in the feminist movement from its start,” and they wanted to be sure that “elitism within the movement” did not marginalize them. The poetry of the black lesbian feminist Audre Lorde began to gain wide circulation at the same time.
In 1972, Gloria Steinem, who had become a major voice of women’s liberation, sometimes to the irritation of Betty Friedan, launched Ms. magazine, which turned into a mass market success when it sold 250,000 copies in its first 8 days. Too tame for some, and too much of a one-woman show for others, Ms. remained a voice of new ideas and important, challenging thinking. It also successfully encouraged a switch from “Mrs.” and “Miss” to the marriage-neutral term “Ms.” that matched the equally neutral “Mr.”
786 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Other women were lobbying state legislatures to make abortions legal. Among them was a young attorney, Sarah Weddington, who took on a Texas case that would eventually change the abortion laws of the United States. The U.S. Supreme Court heard the initial arguments of the case of Roe v. Wade in the spring of 1972. Jane Roe was a fictitious name to protect the plaintiffs identity. In January 1973, the court announced the 7-2 decision that the right to privacy prevented any state from outlawing abortion in the first two trimesters of a woman’s pregnancy. Roe v. Wade would lead to battles about abortion and the role of the courts for decades.
Still other women endeavored to change their working conditions or to open new careers to women. In 1973, Boston office workers organized a group they called “9 to 5,” which became a union. Using new federal laws against workplace discrimination, women also entered nontraditional careers in business and the construction trades that had been closed to them. Women began to appear as plumbers, bus drivers, and senior business executives.
The leaders of NOW, especially Pauli Murray, were determined to revive the struggle for an Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. An Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) was first proposed by the Women’s Party in the early 1920s, immediately after the success of the women’s suffrage amendment. By the 1970s it seemed like the next logical step. Newly elected Representative Shirley Chisholm gave a passionate speech, “Equal Rights for Women” to the House in 1969. NOW began serious lobbying of the Senate in 1970. The ERA passed by a vote of 354 to 24 in the House and 84 to 8 in the Senate. President Nixon endorsed the amendment that said simply, “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any state on account of sex.” As we will see, however, as it moved through state legislatures for ratification, the ERA fell victim to a much changed political atmosphere. The United Farm Workers, 1965-1970
Cesar Chavez began organizing in the grape-growing town of Delano, California, in 1961. He was soon joined by Dolores Huerta. The Farm Workers Association (FWA), which later became the United Farm Workers union, drew on both the community organizing model developed by Saul Alinsky in Chicago and on the older tradition of a mutual benefits association within the Catholic Church. Catholic priests and nuns, Protestant ministers, and members of the United Auto Workers Union all helped the FWA grow. College students, many fresh from campus-based protest and civil rights activity, joined the effort. It was a powerful coalition, stretching far beyond the small towns of California’s little noticed agricultural regions.
In September 1965, Chavez, Huerta, and Larry Itliong, a leader of the Filipino farm workers, planned a coordinated effort by Filipino and Latino organizers and called a major strike for the fall harvest in Delano. A meeting of 1,200 Mexican American workers on September 16, 1965, began with a chant ‘ Viva la Huelga! Viva la Causa! The drawn-out Delano strike and subsequent grape boycott had begun and received widespread support across the country. It took 5 years, but on July 29, 1970, the Delano grape growers signed a contract recognizing the farm workers union as their bargaining agent. Chavez declared, “From now on, all grapes will be sweet.
The American Indian Movement—From Alcatraz to Wounded Knee
In November 1969, American Indians began a year-and-a-half siege of the abandoned federal prison on Alcatraz Island that gained national attention. Earlier, in 1964, Vine Deloria, a 30-old Standing Rock Sioux, won leadership of the National Congress of American Indians that had been founded in 1944 to support the development of Indian tribal governments. A new direction began for the nations largest Indian organization. The American Indian Movement (AIM) was founded in Minneapolis among urban Indians in the late 1960s, but become a major force on the reservations in the 1970s, making some of its leaders like Russell Means and Dennis Banks national figures.
27J
Roe v. Wade
The U.S. Supreme Court's landmark 1973 decision declaring antiabortion laws unconstitutional and protecting a woman's right to choose.
272
United Farm Workers
A union of migrant workers of California, which bargained for better salaries and working conditions.
American Indian Movement (AIM)
The most widely recognized of several American civil rights organizations in tl 1970s.
Chapter 27 Rights, Reaction, and Limits
American Voices
Three Views on Women’s Rights
■JIMhen Betty Frieda and Pauli Murray launched NOW in 1966, WW they wanted the equivalent of the NAACP for women—a national organization to lobby, raise issues in the media, and reach a wide audience. In 1969, Shulamith Firestone spoke for more radical feminists through the Redstockings Manifesto. While NOW blamed a system of oppression, Redstockings blamed men. In response to both, Phyllis Schlafly challenged their basic approach and specifically the momentum building for an Equal Rights Amendment.
National Organization for Women, Statement of Purpose, 1966
We, men and women who hereby constitute ourselves as the National Organization for Women, believe that the time has come for a new movement toward true equality for all women in America, and toward a fully equal partnership of the sexes, as part of the world-wide revolution of human rights now taking place...
WE BELIEVE
that the power of American law, and the protection guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution to the civil rights of all individuals, must be effectively applied and enforced to isolate and remove patterns of sex discrimination, to ensure equality of opportunity in employment and education, and equality of civil and political rights and responsibilities on behalf of women... WE REJECT
the current assumptions that a man must carry the sole burden of supporting himself, his wife, and family, and that a woman is automatically entitled to lifelong support by a man upon her marriage; or that marriage, home and family are primarily a woman's world and responsibility—hers, to dominate, his to support. We believe that a true partnership between the sexes demands a different concept of marriage, an equitable sharing of the responsibilities of home and children, and the economic burdens of their support. Source: Ellen Skinner, Women and the National Experience: Sources in Women's History (Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2011), pp.358-360.
Redstockings Manifesto, July 7,1969
I
After centuries of individual and preliminary political struggle, women are uniting to achieve their final liberation from male supremacy. Redstocking is dedicated to building this unity and winning our freedom. II
Women are an oppressed class. Our oppression is total, affecting every facet of our lives. We are exploited as sex objects, breeders, domestic servants, and cheap labor. We are considered inferior beings, whose only purpose is to enhance men's lives. Our humanity is denied. Our prescribed behavior is enforced by the threat of physical violence. Because we have lived so intimately with our oppressors, in isolation from each other, we have been kept from seeing our personal suffering as a political condition. This creates the illusion that a woman's relationship with her man is a matter of interplay between two unique personalities, and can be worked out individually. In reality, every such relationship is a class relationship, and the conflicts between individual men and women are political conflicts that can only be solved collectively.
788 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
III
We identify the agents of our oppression as men. Male supremacy is the oldest, most basic form of domination. All other forms of exploitation and oppression (racism, capitalism, imperialism, etc.) are extensions of male supremacy: men dominate women, a few men dominate the rest. All power structures throughout history have been male-dominated and male-oriented. Men have controlled all political, economic, and cultural institutions and backed up this control with physical force. They have used their power to keep women in an inferior position. All men receive economic, sexual, and psychological benefits from male supremacy. All men have oppressed women. IV
Attempts have been made to shift the burden of responsibility from men to institutions or to women themselves. We condemn these arguments as evasions. Institutions alone do not oppress; they are merely tools of the oppressor. To blame institutions implies that men and women are equally victimized, obscures the fact that men benefit from the subordination of women, and gives men the excuse that they are forced to be oppressors. On the contrary, any man is free to renounce his superior position, provided that he is willing to be treated like a woman by other men. We also reject the idea that women consent to or are to blame for their own oppression. Women's submission is not the result of brainwashing, stupidity or mental illness but of continual, daily pressure from men. We do not need to change ourselves, but to change men.
The most slanderous evasion of all is that women can oppress men. The basis for this illusion is the isolation of individual relationships from their political context and the tendency of men to see any legitimate challenge to their privileges as persecution.
VWe regard our persona, experience, and our feelings about that experience, as the basis for an analysis of our common situation. We cannot rely on existing ideologies as they are all products of male supremacist culture. We question every generalization and accept none that are not confirmed by our experience.
Our chief task at present is to develop female class consciousness through sharing experience and publicly exposing the sexist foundation of all our institutions. Consciousness-raising is not "therapy," which implies the existence of individual solutions and falsely assumes that the male-female relationship is purely personal, but the only method by which we can ensure that our program for liberation is based on the concrete realities of our lives.
The first requirement for raising class consciousness is honesty, in private and in public, with ourselves and other women.
VI
We identify with all women. We define our best interest as that of the poorest, most brutally exploited woman. We repudiate a11 economic, racial, educational or status privileges that divide us from other women. We are determined to recognize and eliminate any prejudices we may hold against other women.
We are committed to achieving internal democracy. We will do whatever is necessary to ensure that every woman in our movement has an equal chance to participate, assume responsibility, and develop her political potential.
VI,
We cal, on al, our sisters to unite with us in struggle. We call on all men to give up their male privilege and support women s liberation in the interest of our humanity and their own.
In fighting for our liberation we will always take the side of women against their oppressors. We will not ask what is '/revolu-tionary''or"reformist,''only what is good for women.
The time for individual skirmishes has passed. This time we are going all the way.
Source: © 2000-2013 by Redstockings, Inc.
Phyllis Schlafly, "What's Wrong with 'Equal Rights' for Women?", February 1972
Of all the classes of people who ever lived, the American woman is the most privileged.
We have the most rights and rewards, and the fewest duties....
Women's lib is a total assault on the role of the American woman as wife and mother, and on the family as the basic unit of society. Women's libbers are trying to make wives and mothers unhappy with their career, make them feel that they are "second-class citizens" and "abject slaves." Women's libbers are promoting free sex instead of the "slavery" of marriage. They are promoting federal "day-care centers" for babies instead of homes. They are promoting abortions instead of families.
Why should we trade in our special privileges and honored status for the alleged advantage of working in an office or assembly line? Most women would rather cuddle a baby than a typewriter or factory machine. Most women find that it is easier to get along with a husband than a foreman or office manager. Offices and factories require many more menial and repetitious chores than washing dishes and ironing shirts.
Women's libbers do not speak for the majority of American women. American women do not want to be liberated from husbands and children. We do not want to trade our birthright of the special privileges of American women—for the mess of pottage called the Equal Rights Amendment....
Source: Phyllis Schlafly Report 5, no. 7 (February 1972).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did each author define marriage? What role did each author see marriage as playing, or potentially playing, in American society?
2.	Contextualization
What was the audience for each of the three documents included here? What strategies did the authors use to influence their intended audiences?
In 1973, traditionalists among the Sioux on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota staged a dramatic takeover of the village of Wounded Knee, site of the massacre of 1890. Dennis Banks and Russell Means became the spokespersons for AIM and dared the federal government to repeat the attack. The standoff lasted 71 days as AIM held the town as agents of the U.S. Marshall Service and the FBI surrounded them. In May, after an FBI agent had been seriously wounded and two AIM members killed, both sides agreed to end the siege, and the Sioux won a government agreement to reconsider the treaty rights of the Oglala Sioux.
Another demonstration soon followed when Indians staged a sit in at the Bureau of Indian Affairs offices in Washington, DC. In 1975, two FBI agents were killed in another standoff at Pine Ridge, and one of the AIM leaders, Leonard Peltier, was arrested and sentenced to prison for life, although his involvement in the violence and the verdict in his case remain hotly contested almost 40 years later.
The upsurge of Indian activity at Alcatraz, Wounded Knee, the Bureau of Indian Affairs office in Washington, and elsewhere gained more than publicity. In 1970, the Nixon administration negotiated the return of the Blue Lake in New Mexico, considered sacred by the Taos people, to the Taos Pueblo. In 1971, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act was passed by Congress, resolving long-standing land disputes. The 1972 Indian Education Act also provided funds for new schools that would be under tribal control. In 1973, the government began again to recognize Indian tribes as legitimate agents, starting with the Menominees in Wisconsin.
Changing Issues of Race and Diversity in the 1970s
The most dramatic scenes of the black Civil Rights Movement in the 1950s and 1960s took place in the South. In the 1970s, integration efforts moved north. Although Boston had a national reputation for liberalism, Boston’s tightly knit ethnic neighborhoods could be hostile to outsiders. In 1974, federal courts found
Chapter 27 Rights^
LKJ
272
27J
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Young Lords Party and the Origin of Political Movements in the 1970s
27 J
27 A
Historians have debated why so many different political movements—among women, Latinos, American Indians, gay men and lesbians, and others—emerged in the late 1960s and 1970s. In the 1950s and early 1960s, the Civil Rights Movement had been confined almost exclusively to the black freedom struggle. A new white student movement also emerged in the 1960s. In the next 10 years, it seemed, every group of Americans was starting to demand its own rights and to challenge social injustice wherever it was found.
One of the most colorful, if short-lived movement groups was the Young Lords Party, a Puerto Rican group that came into existence in New York City in 1969. Pablo Guzman, one of the founders of the Young Lords, remembered their origins. His description of the diverse forces that led them to organize sheds light on the experience of many other groups.
In Guzman's account, the Young Lords began with a street protest in the summer of 1969.
"All we had been trying to do after sweeping up the streets on previous Sundays was talk with sanitation about once-a-week pickups and nonexistent trash cans, and about how to decently treat people asking for help instead of blowing them off." If protests helped win victories for the African-American community, they reasoned, why not them. But when the protest produced an angry police presence, Guzman and his friends decided to recruit others. "It was the summer of 1969, and the first stateside organization of radical young Puerto Ricans was announcing itself—we hoped—as a political force."
They quickly learned about La Raza Unida (the people united) that was emerging among Mexican Americans in the West, about the Weather Underground that had broken off from the Students for a Democratic Society to embrace more violent tactics, and about the Black Panther Party, the militant black organization, on which the Young Lords would model themselves. They
were also influenced by international connections in a world where many were challenging American dominance. Guzman had spent a semester studying in Mexico. He said, "I left as Paul Guzman, a nervous only-child of a Puerto Rican-Cuban mother and a Puerto Rican father...I came back to the states as Pablo Guzman."
While other groups influenced young urban Puerto Ricans like Guzman, there were also other roots to the protest movement, as Guzman reflected:
But it didn't come from nowhere—my parents and my grandparents, after all, had first instilled in me a sense that there was far too long a history of injustice in this society. "Only,"as my father would say later at my trial, "your mother and I never thought you would actually try to do something about it. Not on such a scale, anyhow."
But with deep roots in their own communities and with the inspiration of seeing others, the Young Lords, like the American Indian Movement or the gay men of the Stonewall Inn, were not going to remain quiet in the face of what they saw as significant injustice.
Note: Today, Pablo Guzman is a senior journalist with CBS news.
Source: Pablo Guzman, the Village Voice, March 21,1995.
Thinking Critically
1.	Compare and Contrast
How does Guzman's description compare with the emergence of other movements described in this chapter?
2.	Historical Interpretation
How much did Guzman's family history impact what he did in comparison to other Civil Rights Movements that were developing in 1969?

nvi

that the Boston School Committee (the local name for the school board) had engaged in a deliberate policy of redrawing school district lines to maintain racial segregation, and the court ordered an immediate integration of the schools, transferring students across the city by bus, for the opening of school in the fall of 1974. Boston exploded. It was many years before peace returned to the Boston schools.
While Boston was split over school integration, New York was split over a proposal developed by community leaders, the mayor, and the Ford Foundation for local community control of public schools. In certain “experimental districts,” in predominantly Puerto Rican East Harlem, and an African-American neighborhood in Brooklyn, local school boards were elected and given powers previously held by the
790 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
The occupation of Wounded Knee, site of the 1890 massacre, took on great symbolic significance for many American Indians.
central office. When the Brooklyn board transferred 12 white teachers out of the district in May 1968, the overwhelmingly white New York teachers union called a citywide strike that lasted for much of the 1968-69 school year, crippled the schools, and exacerbated racial tensions in New York.
In other cities such as Detroit, Cleveland, Baltimore, St. Louis, Milwaukee, and Buffalo, whites virtually deserted the city for the suburbs. As a result, more African-Americans were elected to mayor’s offices. Richard Hatcher had been elected mayor of Gary, Indiana, and Carl Stokes mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, in 1967; Tom Bradley was elected in Los Angeles, Coleman Young in Detroit, and Maynard Jackson in Atlanta, all in 1973; and Walter Washington in Washington, DC, in 1974.
Blacks and Latinos also began to seek opportunities in higher education in numbers never seen before. A growing black middle class could afford college in substantial numbers for the first time, and Johnson-era affirmative action programs opened doors. But some whites felt that affirmative action subjected them to “reverse discrimination.” The arguments about affirmative action came to a head when Allan Bakke, a white applicant, was rejected for admission to the medical school at the University of California at Davis in 1973. Bakke sued, claiming that he had been denied because the university held 16 percent of the slots for minority students. In the U.S. Supreme Court’s Bakke decision in June of 1978, four justices ruled that race-based programs were illegal and that the university had discriminated against Bakke while four justices ruled that race-based affirmative action was constitutional. The ninth justice, Lewis Powell, joined with those ordering Bakke s admission, but on much more limited grounds. Powell said that an individual could not be excluded solely on the basis of race, but that race could be a consideration. One law professor remarked, It was a landmark occasion, but the court failed to produce a landmark decision.
Bakke decision
The U.S. Supreme Court's 1978 decision th. limited, but did not end, affirmative actioj programs to achieve racial diversity in a university's student body.
Chapter 27 Rights,
ind Limits 791
Woodstock Music and Art Fair
A countercultural music festival that attracted an audience of over 400,000 in 1969.
In 1974, the U.S. Supreme Court in Lau v. Nichols ruled that school districts must make accommodations for students who came to school not speaking English. These accommodations could include English-immersion programs or full bilingual programs. They could not, as San Francisco had been doing, simply tell a non-English speaker like Kenny Lau to make the best of it and learn English on his own. A year later, in November 1975, Congress passed and President Ford signed the Education for all Handicapped Children Act requiring the “least restrictive” possible accommodation for students with special needs.
The 1970s were also a time in which the nature of American racial diversity began to change. In 1965, when Lyndon Johnson signed a new immigration law, only five percent of immigrants to the United States were from Asia. In the 1970s, that number climbed to 50 percent. Small Japanese and Chinese communities grew dramatically while immigrants began to arrive from India, Pakistan, and Korea. Especially in California, the growing Asian population changed state and local politics. Immigration from Latin America also increased significantly, not only from Mexico but also from many countries of Central and South American as well as the racially diverse islands of the Caribbean. With this growing racial diversity, interracial marriages became more common. A child with one Asian parent and one parent from Central America was not adequately described with traditional ethnic labels.
Out of the Closet—Stonewall and Gay/Lesbian Rights
The New York Times for June 29,1969, carried an article that reported a shift in the city’s gay community that would eventually spread to the nation. Of particular note, it said:
Hundreds of young men went on a rampage in Greenwich Village shortly after 3 a.m. yesterday after a force of plainclothes men raided a bar that the police said was well known for its homosexual clientele.
Something shifted when a group of gay men, whom the police assumed would submit quietly to arrest as they had in the past, refused to do so. Many who had long kept their identities hidden stood up. Many would never return to a closeted life. In the 1970s, gay liberation became a political movement.
While the American Psychological Association (APA) had traditionally defined homosexuality as “a form of mental illness,” pressure from outside and from within its own ranks led to a 1973 change when its board voted to remove homosexuality from its list of psychiatric disorders. “We will be removing one of the justifications for the denial of civil rights to individuals whose only crime is that their sexual orientation is to members of the same sex,” an APA leader said.
In November 1974, Elaine Nobel was elected to the Massachusetts state legislature as the first openly lesbian or gay state representative in the United States. The following January, Minnesota state senator, Allan Spear, announced that he, too, was gay and, inspired by Nobel, would no longer keep his sexual orientation a secret. Then in 1977, Harvey Milk, a gay man, was elected to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors, symbolizing the radical change that was taking place.
A
Counterculture and Its Critics—Sex, Drugs, and Rock'n' Roll The summer after Richard Nixons inauguration, more than 400,000 young Americans gathered on August 15-17, 1969, on a farm in Bethel, New York, for the Woodstock Music and Art Fair. Many more would have attended if massive traffic jams and rain-induced mud had not made travel to Woodstock exceedingly difficult. Those who attended Woodstock heard Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, and Jefferson Airplane as well as folk performers, including Joan Baez. Many smoked marijuana, swam in the nude, and generally enjoyed a weekend free from the constraints of traditional society. If any event stands as a symbol of the counterculture of the late 1960s, Woodstock was that event. It was also a symbol that stood closer to the end of the countercultures life than the beginning.
792 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Several factors helped create the counterculture’s hippies of the 1960s. One was the creation of hallucinogenic drugs. The creation of a diethylamide of lysergic acid (LSD) by Albert Hoffman (no relation to Abbie Hoffman), who was seeking a way to treat schizophrenia, set a new generation on a drug-assisted search for vision quests and heightened ecstasy in body and soul. LSD was popularized by Timothy Leary and Ken Kesey as the key to the ultimate revelation or a way to “blow your mind.” Music was also essential to the counterculture. Rock n roll had gone through extraordinary changes in the 1960s. Two British rock groups, the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, became huge hits in the United States in the early 1960s with music that mocked mainstream music, including songs like A Hard Day’s Night.” Bob Dylan moved from folk music to rock. His Like a Rolling Stone” moved to number one on the charts. In Sergeant Pepper s Lonely Hearts Club Band” and their first movie, Yellow Submarine, the Beatles embraced the psychedelic world. Finally, anger at a war that seemed always to be escalating led some, notably Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin, to conclude that the best protest was street theater and humor that mocked those who they thought were leading the country to ruin.
If the counterculture had a physical home, it was in San Francisco’s Haight-Ashbury district from 1966 to 1969. In Haight-Ashbury, the counterculture ruled its own small domain. Street theater could be seen on every corner. A group called the Diggers gave out free food. Relationships were casual and informal. Drugs were easily available. The summer of 1967 was declared the “summer of love,” and young people from every corner of the United States streamed into “the Haight” to “make love, not war.” But drugs led to too many emergency room visits and violence. Rock heroes Janice Joplin and Jimi Hendrix both died of drug overdoses in 1970 and Jim Morrison died in 1971, each 27 years old. Venereal disease spread rapidly. The free food disappeared, and the street actors went elsewhere. Utopia, it seemed, could not last long.
The Woodstock festival of 1969 was a 3-day celebration of new freedoms that were already passing for many.
Quick Review How might an historian account for the many political and cultural movements that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s?
THE CULTURE WARS OF THE
1970s 27 .J
Analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
In the 1970s, the United States was a deeply divided nation. Among activist women there were major conflicts between feminist and with antifeminist groups. Conservative Protestants, Catholics, and Jews found new common ground, often in opposition to liberals in their own traditions. The nations deep racial divides shifted as various groups representing specific ethnicities—whites, blacks, Latinos, Asians, and American Indians—moved in different directions.
Phyllis Schlafly and the Defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment
Perhaps no one symbolized the new political situation, what some have called the culture wars of the 1970s, as much as Phyllis Schlafly. Schlafly was born Phyllis Stewart in a middle-class family in St. Louis, Missouri, in August 1924,3 years after Betty Friedan, another child of the Midwest. However, their paths diverged dramatically. Schlafly, deeply influenced by her Roman Catholic background and the commitment to individual responsibility she was taught as a child, became a Republican Party activist.
Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, Schlafly was a conservative activist within the Republican Party. She organized grassroots efforts for Barry Goldwater and wrote A Choice Not an Echo, an attack on liberals within the Republican Party.
Chapter 27 Rights, Reaction, and Limits 7{
MAP 27-1 Support and Opposition to the ERA. Although the majority of state legislatures voted to approve the proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, the amendment fell three states short of the required three-fourth's approval.
After the Goldwater defeat, a new opportunity opened for her. In December 1971, Schlafly was invited to a debate in Connecticut. She wanted to focus on national defense, but was told that the focus would be the Equal Rights Amendment that was being debated at that time in the U.S. Senate. Schlafly had no opinion of the amendment, but agreed to read up on it before coming to Connecticut. She did, and the result was her decision to make opposition to the ERA her prime focus.
In 1972, as Congress was voting on the ERA, Schlafly wrote “What’s Wrong with ‘Equal Rights’ for Women?” and then launched the STOP ERA initiative. Schlafly pulled in women whom she knew from anticommunist organizing. By early 1973, STOP ERA had chapters in 26 states. Eventually, 35 states ratified the ERA, but it fell three short of the required 38 states and was not added to the Constitution (see Map 27-1). Schlafly claimed much of the credit for its defeat. New cultural issues, including opposition to feminism, to abortion rights, to homosexual rights, and to the defense of prayer in school, as well as a particular definition of morality and law and order in the larger society, became the keys to a new conservative constituency and, for Phyllis Schlafly, a new career as an activist. For the Republican Party, they would be the keys to victory in several future election cycles.
Equal Rights Amendment
A proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution giving women equal rights with men; ratified by 35 states, three short of the needed number.
Moral Majority
One of the first large-scale organizations of the emerging "religious right," which organized support for conservative candidates and was a major force in American politics in the early 1980s.
Phyllis Schlafly gave nundreds of speeches, like this one at the Illinois state capitol building, convincing enough states to defeat the proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
The Rise of the Religious Right
Looking back at the 1972 election, Charles Colson, one of Nixon’s prime advisers said, “It was.. .the first time in modern American political history that social issues became dominant.” They would become even more dominant in later campaigns.
In 1978, Pat Robertson, who had founded the Christian Broadcasting Network in 1960, said that if traditionalist Catholics and evangelical Protestants, long distrustful of each other, could come together, “We have enough votes to run the country.” These were fighting words and they made Robertson a central player in the religious right in the 1980s.
By far the most powerful expression of the growing religious right in the 1970s was a new organization, the Moral Majority, founded by Reverend Jerry Falwell, pastor of the Thomas Road Baptist Church in Lynchburg, Virginia, which claimed 17,000 members. Falwell was also president of Liberty Baptist College (later Liberty University) and host of the television Old Time Gospel Hour, which ran on 300 stations for an audience of some 1.5 million people.
The Moral Majority was, Falwell said, “pro-life, pro-family, pro-morality, and pro-American.” It was anti-ERA, in favor of prayer in schools, the teaching of alternatives to evolution, and like some earlier secular conservative movements, intensely anticommunist. Falwell opposed U.S. foreign policy that favored the relaxation of tensions with the Soviet Union and called on the nation’s leaders to fight communism. He said, “Our government has the right to use its armaments to bring wrath upon those who would do evil.” Falwell, who had opposed civil rights in the 1960s said, “If you would like to know where I am politically, I am to the right of wherever you are. I thought Goldwater was too liberal.” The Moral Majority helped to register perhaps 2 million new voters before the 1980 election. They were a force to be reckoned with.
273
Quick Review Were the culture wars of the 1970s—STOP ERA and the Moral Majority-reactions to earlier liberalism or something new in American culture and politics? Support your answer.
794 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
27.4
POLITICS, ECONOMICS, AND THE IMPACT OF WATERGATE
Explain the political impact of Watergate and subsequent developments that set the stage for the "Reagan Revolution."
U.S. leadership and the U.S. economy faltered in the 1970s. The three presidents who served during that decade were ultimately viewed as flawed or weak. Nixon was driven from office in a scandal called Watergate. His successor, Gerald Ford, disappointed many, particularly for pardoning Nixon, and Ford’s successor, Jimmy Carter, was unable to pull a nation out of a crisis with Iran and out of a gas crisis at home. The country, desperate for strong leadership, put its faith in a movie-star-turned-politician, Ronald Reagan, to start a new decade.
The Economic Context
The 1950s and 1960s had been decades of almost constant economic growth. During the 1960s, the nation’s poverty rate dropped from 22.2 percent to 12.6 percent. The income of many Americans rose dramatically. More Americans had more to spend and more financial security than in any previous generation. While the 1970s did not see anything like a return to the financial distress of the 1930s, they were not such good times. The sense of decline was widespread.
Although the U.S. economy grew in the 1960s, the economies of other countries, especially Germany and Japan, grew more quickly. U.S corporations failed to invest in research and development as much as companies in competing countries. Americans began buying foreign-made goods that were less expensive or of better quality. U.S. manufacturers moved production to other countries where wages were lower, costing U.S. workers their jobs. In 1971, for the first time since 1900, the United States imported more than it exported.
Throughout the 1970s, unemployment continued to be much higher than in the 1960s. While high unemployment normally meant low inflation, inflation also remained high during the decade, and the combination came to be known as “stagflation.” To keep taxes low and foster public support for the Great Society, while also increasing military spending for Vietnam, Lyndon Johnson had allowed government debt to grow dramatically. Nixon also did little to reduce government debt, using government programs to build popularity while keeping taxes low for the same reason. The result was continued inflation in spite of the unemployment. When federal officials tried to reduce unemployment by providing stimuli to the economy, inflation got worse. When they cut spending, unemployment soared. The country began to talk about a “misery index”—the combined harm done by unemployment and inflation. Between March and December 1974, the Dow Jones Industrial average fell from 892 to 577, a major loss for investors.
The economy was further undermined by a rapid rise in energy costs. In retaliation for U.S. support for Israel during the Yorn Kippur war in October 1973, Arab members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) raised the price of oil on the world market. Oil, which had sold for $1.77 a barrel in October 1973, rose to $12 a barrel by the spring of 1974. Suddenly gasoline and heating oil were very expensive. Presidents Nixon, Ford, and Carter were all bedeviled by public anger over long lines at gas stations, something Americans had not experienced since World War
II.
Average Americans saw their disposable income decline as more money had to be spent to keep their cars running and their houses warm. American automakers were slow to anticipate the impact of the rising prices for gasoline and kept making only large gas-guzzling cars. As a result, sales of Japanese imports, Toyotas, Hondas, and Datsuns, which had held only a small share of the U.S. auto market, soared. Steel mills, tire manufacturers, auto parts makers, and, of course, Ford, Chrysler, and General Motors, all cut back and laid off workers. Unemployment rose, especially in the Northeast and Midwest, a region that took on the new name of the Rustbelt. A 1976 New York Times series described the shift from the old industrial
27.1
272
273
27.4
Chapter 27 Rights, Reaction, and Lin^ts 795
Watergate
The crisis that began with a illegal break-in at the Democratic Headquarters in the Watergate complex and ended with Richard Nixon's resignation.
Northwest and Midwest to the South and Southwest, “All day and through the lonely night the moving vans push southward, the 14-wheeled boxcars of the highway, changing the demographic face of America.”
Ihe rapid decline of the Rustbelt and the equally rapid growth of the South and Southwest meant many things to the United States in the 1970s. The South itself had certainly changed. It was no longer the rigidly racially segregated economic backwater it was in the 1950s. Indeed, the South was more racially integrated than the North. Tanya Tucker’s 1974 song, “The South Is Gonna Rise Again,” told her audience that the South would rise, “but not the way they thought it would back then. I see everybody hand-in-hand.” In the new economy, Tucker sang, “I see sons and daughters of sharecroppers but they’re not pickin’ cotton anymore.” But they were also not joining unions, and wages in the South stayed lower than in the North. Elected representatives of the new South tended to oppose what they saw as an intrusive government.
For some, the rise of the air-conditioned “Sunbelt” stretching from the Old Confederacy through the Southwest of Arizona and California, was a chance for a fresh start in fast growing cities like Houston, Texas, or Phoenix, Arizona, and the suburbs around them. For others, especially those left behind in the north, it was a disaster. In 1975-76, New York City suffered a major financial crisis. When the decline in city tax revenue and federal aid meant that the city could not pay its bills, it was forced to lay off 3,400 police officers, 1,000 firefighters, and 4,000 hospital workers. Cleveland eventually defaulted on its debts in 1978. Throughout the North, city services declined and crime spiraled.
There seemed to be relatively little that the federal government could do through the 1970s to change the economic situation or address stagflation. Tax cuts, proposed by every administration, did not have the impact that some hoped and, in the absence of corresponding cuts in federal spending, which were highly unpopular, tended to fuel further inflation. Americans found themselves in an unaccustomed era of limits, and they regularly took their anger out on political leaders of both parties.
Watergate and the End of the Nixon Presidency
When he was reelected in November 1972, Nixon seemed to be at the peak of his powers. In fact, he was beginning a long slow decline that would make his second term a torture for him, his administration, and ultimately, the country until he finally resigned in disgrace in August 1974.
The constitutional crisis known as Watergate began with a simple burglary in June 1972. As the election campaign heated up, the special operations group known as “the plumbers,” was set up within the ill-named Committee to Re-elect the President (CREEP). G. Gordon Liddy, leader of the plumbers recommended to CREEP’S director, former Attorney General John Mitchell, and his deputy Jeb Stuart Magruder, that they break into the offices of Democratic Committee chair Lawrence O’Brien, which were housed in the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C., to put a tap on his telephone. Mitchell and Magruder approved the plan, but the plumbers were caught. Police found an address book on the burglars that included a number for E. Howard Hunt, a former plumber now working for CREEP, and both Hunt and Liddy were soon arrested as co-conspirators in the break-in.
The White House dismissed the whole thing as a “third-rate burglary.” If Nixon had simply admitted the stupidity and fired Hunt and Liddy, perhaps even Mitchell and Magruder, the issue might have ended there. But such a move was not Nixon’s style. His orders to his chief aide, Haldeman, were to “play it tough” and, most fatefully to order the CIA to stop an FBI investigation of the burglary. In those moves, the grounds for the eventual impeachment of the president were laid since the CIA order to the FBI was an obstruction of justice.
While the Democratic candidate George McGovern tried to raise the issue during the fall campaign, not much came of it. But when Hunt and Liddy went to trial in front
796 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
of federal district judge John J. Sirica, the judge quickly determined that there was more to the case than a simple burglary. In addition, two Washington Post reporters, Carl Bernstein and Robert Woodward, also began a search for more information, including the cultivation of a secret source who they called Deep Throat. (Only decades later was it revealed that Deep Throat was Mark Felt, Deputy Director of the FBI, who was angry that the FBI had been ordered out of the case and angry at Nixon for passing him over for the director s position when the FBI’s long time director J. Edgar Hoover died.)
In January 1973, just as Nixon began his second term, the Watergate burglars were found guilty in federal court. Sirica gave them all maximum sentences, but promised to reconsider if they would break their silence. One of the burglars, James McCord, started to talk to federal prosecutors. By April, not only McCord but also John Dean, Nixon s White House lawyer, and Deputy Campaign Director Magruder were talking to the Grand Jury. They also talked to staff of a Senate Select Committee, chaired by Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina. At that point, several of Nixon’s closest advisers, including Haldeman and Ehrlichman resigned. Still, proof of the president’s knowledge or involvement of the affair was lacking. Then in May, the Ervin Committee started to hold televised hearings, and the nation first watched McCord accuse Dean and Mitchell, and then watched Dean accuse the White House. They also learned that Nixon had secretly taped conversations in the Oval Office to preserve a record for his memoirs.
By fall, Ervin, Sirica, and Archibald Cox, a Justice Department special prosecutor, all demanded the Oval Office tapes. Nixon refused to turn them over, claiming “executive privilege,” the right of the president to keep White House deliberations confidential. On October 20, the president ordered his Attorney General, Elliot Richardson, to fire Cox as special prosecutor. Richardson refused, and Nixon fired Richardson, then fired Deputy Attorney General William Ruckelshaus. Finally, the third-ranking person at the Justice Department, Robert Bork, fired Cox. The moment was known as the “Saturday Night Massacre.” Nixon surrendered only some of the tapes, including one from days after the break-in that had an “accidental” eighteen and one-half minute erasure. Public opinion started turning against the president.
The administration, so thoroughly embroiled in scandal and secrecy, was not able to pursue much else in foreign or domestic policy. It was in the middle of the Watergate crisis that Arab leaders, angry at Nixon’s efforts first to reduce the dollar’s value in international exchange rates (since oil was paid for in U.S. dollars) and then to support Israel, retaliated by increasing the cost of oil by some seven times. When in June 1974 Nixon tried to deflect his domestic troubles with another dramatic international trip— to Moscow to meet with Soviet leaders—the summit produced no meaningful results.
In the meantime, things seemed to go from bad to worse for the president. In October 1973, Vice President Spiro Agnew was convicted of soliciting kickbacks and forced to resign. Nixon appointed House Republican leader Gerald Ford as vice president. Ford, a popular leader with no particular ties to the White House, was quickly confirmed. As the investigation uncovered more of Nixon’s dealings, the president responded, I am not a crook.” It was a low point in presidential history. But more was to come.
In March 1974, Haldeman, Ehrlichman, and former Attorney General Mitchell were indicted. Federal courts ordered that the White House tapes be turned over to the courts and to the House committee, which had begun drawing up charges that would lead to the impeachment of the president. Nixon appealed the decision about the tapes. On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled that Watergate was a criminal matter and executive privilege did not apply. The tapes had to be handed over. On July 27, Democrats and many Republicans on the House committee began voting to recommend the impeachment of the president for obstruction of justice.
Rather than face the full House vote and the trial in the Senate, both of which he now knew he would lose, Nixon went on television on the evening of August 8 and told the nation, “I have never been a quitter. To leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent to every instinct in my body. But as president, I must put the interest of America first... .Therefore, I shall resign the Presidency effective at noon tomorrow.”
27J
272
273
27.4
Chapter 27 Rights, Reaction, ancUgMjfc 797
273
272
273
27.4
Detente
The policy of building better understanding and a more peaceful relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union.
As the Nixon family began a sad journey to their home in San Clemente, California, Gerald Ford was sworn in as president. The nation breathed a sigh of relief that a long and distracting ordeal was over. Conservative columnist James J. Kilpatrick wrote, “The swearing-in of Gerald Ford can’t come one hour too soon. At noon on April 9, Chief Justice Warren Burger, just after administering the presidential oath to Ford, turned to Pennsylvania Senator Hugh Scott and said, “Hugh, it worked. Thank God it worked.” Burger was celebrating the victory of the Constitution. Ford tried hard to live up to the trust that people, liberal and conservative, now placed in him. But he did not inherit an easy situation.
Gerald Ford
Gerald Ford entered the White House with high approval ratings. He also inherited an economy that was staggering from inflation and unemployment as well as an international scene that included the last stages of the defeat of South Vietnam. Fortunately for him, there was a sense of bipartisan good will in his early days in office. George Reedy, a staunch Democrat and former press secretary for Lyndon Johnson, said, “Ford is one of the very few men in public life whose absolute honesty I do not question.” Such a reputation was a precious, if limited, asset as Ford faced the nations problems that were now his.
Ford came from Grand Rapids, Michigan. He had been an Eagle Scout, a star football player at the University of Michigan in the 1930s, and a Navy veteran of World War II. Like several other World War II veterans, including Kennedy and Nixon, Ford entered politics soon after the war, winning a seat in the House of Representatives in 1948. He gained a reputation for hard work and honesty and was elected House Minority Leader in 1965. Even so, not everyone respected him. Lyndon Johnson said that the House Minority Leader had played football once too often without a helmet. Before and during his presidency, he was often portrayed as long-winded and bumbling.
The new president believed that his top priority was to heal a wounded nation. A month after taking office, he made a controversial proposal that draft evaders be given amnesty in return for alternative service as a way to heal the divisions of the Vietnam War. Ford gave Richard Nixon a “full, free, and absolute pardon” for any crimes committed during his administration. Some hinted that Ford had made a deal with Nixon, but the new president insisted during and after his term in office that his top priority was healing the country, which included moving beyond Watergate.
Ford was convinced that the best way to counter inflation and unemployment was to get government spending under control and reduce the federal deficit. Congress, however, was very reluctant to accept any of Ford’s proposals to cut federal spending. By January
1975,	as the economy continued to worsen, Ford supported a tax cut. Congress approved an even larger cut than Ford had requested, and he reluctantly signed the popular bill in March 1975. He then proceeded to infuriate Democrats by vetoing a number of federal spending bills. Throughout most of the rest of his term, Ford and the Congress battled over tax and spending issues, both sides wanting tax cuts, but Ford insisting they be offset by spending cuts. Each side was determined to blame the other for ongoing economic woes and to claim the credit when the economy did improve modestly in late 1975 and early
1976.	However, no one could claim that the economy was healthy during Ford’s term.
In addition to economic challenges, Ford had also inherited a number of foreign policy crises. The Cold War was still very real, and when the Soviet Union expelled the author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn in February 1974, public opinion in the United States was inflamed, undermining some of Nixon’s detente efforts to build a new and better relationship with the Soviet Union. Ford calmed U.S.-Soviet relations when he met with Soviet premier Leonid Brezhnev and signed the Helsinki Accords, promising peaceful resolution of outstanding issues and new scientific cooperation. The Middle East, however, remained tense, and India tested its first nuclear weapon in May 1974. In addition, Kissinger, whom Ford had retained as secretary of state, supported a military coup in Argentina in 1976, as he had in Chile in 1973.
798 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
American Voices
Gerald R. Ford, Remarks Upon Taking the Oath of Office as President, 1974
ichard Nixon resigned as president on August 9, 1974, the first president in American history to do so. Nixon's elected vice president, Spiro Agnew, had already resigned and, following a new constitutional amendment, Nixon had appointed Gerald Ford to the office. Thus, when Ford became president in 1974, he was the first president in history to be unelected as either president or vice president. As he took office, he had a strong sense of the kind of national healing that the country needed from him. Moments after being sworn in, he spoke to the nation:
Mr. Chief Justice, my dear friends, my fellow Americans:
The oath that I have taken is the same oath that was taken by George Washington and by every President under the Constitution. But I assume the Presidency under extraordinary circumstances never before experienced by Americans. This is an hour of history that troubles our minds and hurts our hearts....
I am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your President by your ballots, and so I ask you to confirm me as your President with your prayers. And I hope that such prayers will also be the first of many....
I believe that truth is the glue that holds government together, not only our Government but civilization itself. That bond, though strained, is unbroken at home and abroad.
In all my public and private acts as your President, I expect to follow my instincts of openness and candor with full confidence
that honesty is always the best policy in the end.
My fellow Americans, our long national nightmare is over.
Our Constitution works; our great Republic is a government of laws and not of men. Here the people rule. But there is a higher Power, by whatever name we honor Him, who ordains not only righteousness but love, not only justice but mercy.
As we bind up the internal wounds of Watergate, more painful and more poisonous than those of foreign wars, let us restore the golden rule to our political process, and let brotherly love purge our hearts of suspicion and of hate....
God helping me, I will not let you down.
Thank you.
Source: Downloaded July 1,2011 from www.fordlibrarymuseum.gov/library/ speeches/740001 .asp.
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Context
Beyond the Nixon resignation, what "extraordinary circumstances" might Ford be referring to?
2.	Comparison
Why might Americans be willing to trust Gerald Ford's words after the dishonesty of the Johnson and Nixon administrations?
Bill
Most frustrating, however, was Vietnam. The last U.S. troops had been out of Vietnam for more than a year when Ford took office, but military advisers, CIA, and State Department officers remained, and the United States continued to provide crucial aid. Congress was out of patience with the war. In March 1975, Ford briefly considered a recommendation from Kissinger to resume the bombing of North Vietnam but ultimately rejected it. Nevertheless, he was furious when in April Congress refused his request for emergency military aid to South Vietnam. In early 1975, the pro-American government of Laos fell to communists. In early April, the pro-American Lon Nol government of Cambodia fell to the Khmer Rouge. On April 29,1975, the government of South Vietnam surrendered. As North Vietnamese tanks crashed through the gate of the presidential palace in Saigon and the last U.S. helicopters took off from the roof of the American Embassy, there was little Ford could do but attempt the rescue of some Vietnamese orphans, mostly children born as a result of relationships between Vietnamese and U.S. service personnel. The long American presence was over. South Vietnam disappeared and the communist government renamed Saigon as Ho Chi Minh City.
As the 1976 presidential election approached, Ronald Reagan, the popular two-term governor of California challenged Ford in the Republican primaries. Reagan was staunchly anticommunist, attacking Ford and Kissinger for yielding too much to the Soviet Union, and he appealed to conservative voters. But Reagan was not able to dislodge a sitting president. Ford sought to unify the party by replacing his current (appointed) vice president, former New York governor Nelson Rockefeller, on the ticket with a more conservative candidate, Kansas Senator Robert Dole, whom Reagan liked.
Chapter 27 Rights, Reaction, and Limits 799
As the last helicopters left the roof of the U.S. embassy in Saigon in 1975, hundreds of Vietnamese who had supported the U.S. effort tried to get out. Most were left behind.
Democrats believed that after Watergate, and especially after Ford’s pardon of Nixon, 1976 was to be their year, and they waged a vigorous campaign. At the beginning of the primary season, former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter was considered a long-shot in a race that involved some of the nation’s best known leaders, including Washington Senator Henry Jackson and Representative Morris Udall of Arizona. To the surprise of many, Carter won primary after primary and went on to a first-ballot nomination. He selected the well-known liberal senator from Minnesota, Walter Mondale, as his vice president.
Carter started the race with a 20-point lead in the polls, but Ford was a better campaigner than many expected. In the end, Carter’s focus on the continued high inflation and unemployment, the “misery index,” the lingering national anger about Watergate, and Carter’s success in positioning himself as the outsider won the election. Ihe final vote was very close with Carter winning 50 percent of the popular vote to Ford’s 48 percent. Ford took his loss in stride saying, “I want to be remembered as...a nice person, who worked at the job, and who left the White House in better shape than when I took over.” Most agreed he deserved that tribute. Many also looked forward to a more wholesale change of national management in January 1977.
Jimmy Carter's Difficult Years—Gas Lines, Inflation, Iran
By tradition, after taking the oath of office at the Capitol, a new U.S. president leads the inaugural parade back to the White House. Normally the president rides in a limousine, but in 1977, Jimmy Carter chose to walk so he could be closer to the people, something that Carter very much wanted to have as a hallmark of his presidency. In the long campaign, Carter promised “never to tell a lie or to make a misleading statement.” After the lies and cover-up of Watergate and Lyndon Johnson’s “credibility gap,” Carter was a refreshing change.
800 PartVIll Fears,Joys,and Limits, 1945-1980
Jimmy Carter was born in 1924 in the still rigidly segregated South, in the small town of Plains, Georgia. His father was a successful farmer, but Plains was a small place, and Carter left it to attend the U.S. Naval academy at Annapolis, Maryland.
After his navy service, Carter returned to Plains to run the family peanut farm and soon entered politics, serving in the Georgia state Senate in the 1960s. In 1970, he was elected governor of Georgia. Some civil rights leaders never trusted Carter. But in his inaugural address as governor, he said, “The time for racial discrimination is over.”
As governor, Carter courted the King family and created a biracial coalition that he thought should be typical of the ‘New South,” which he sought to represent.
Jimmy Carter and his wife Rosalynn were deeply religious, active members of their Southern Baptist Church in Plains and later in Washington, DC, where Carter taught a Sunday School class. Carter s Christian faith reassured some and worried others, but his unapologetic sincerity and his equally clear commitment to the separation of church and state uninterested in imposing his beliefs on others—tended to win him respect.
Carter s openness, his down-home style, and his fresh approach heightened his popularity. Two months into his administration, the new president had an extraordinary 75 percent public approval rating. The new administration knew from the beginning that the economy was the key to any success they would have. In spite of some modest improvements, stagflation remained a reality, and the rising costs from the energy crisis seemed to grow worse by the minute. During his first year in office, Carter proposed a large economic stimulus package that included $4 billion for public works programs.
Although an economic conservative, Carter was willing to risk inflation to get a sluggish economy moving and put more Americans back to work. He also sought to end government regulations that he thought got in the way of a more robust economy. He signed the Airline Deregulation Act that ended government control of airline prices with significant benefit to consumers. Later in his term, he also supported an expansion of the food stamp program to provide food to the hungry and stimulate the economy.
Carter appointed former Republican cabinet member James Schlesinger as his special adviser on energy—later secretary of energy when Congress approved the new cabinet department—and told Schlesinger to come up with a comprehensive energy plan, and do so in 3 months. Schlesinger did, and Carter appeared on television to tell the nation of his new proposals, which included a “gas guzzler tax” on high-mileage cars, tax credits for conservation, and a total of 113 separate proposals to reduce energy consumption and increase its availability. Newsweek summarized the speech,
“Some of the time he was Jimmy the evangelist, preaching to a nation living in energy sin. Then he was Jimmy the engineer, rattling off statistics and throwing around terms like retrofitting and cogeneration. And then he was Jimmy the leader, summoning the nation to fight the ‘moral equivalent of war.’” Unfortunately for Carter, the energy plan had been developed in secret, and the Congress was far from enthusiastic about it.
Carter also tried to deal with both unemployment and inflation, but by the fall of 1978, he had become convinced that he had to make inflation his top priority. Robert Strauss, a special counselor in the White House tried with some success to “jawbone” business and labor (persuade them through public appeals) to keep wage increases and prices down. Later in 1978, Carter appointed Alfred Kahn to institute wage and price freezes. Still inflation increased. As Americans used credit cards to keep up with the increases in costs, credit card and other consumer debt grew from $167 billion when Carter took office to $315 billion in 1979, further fueling the inflationary spiral. Only late in Carter’s presidency did inflation decline when Paul Volcker, chair of the Federal Reserve Board, dramatically shrank the nation’s money supply, causing a major upsurge in unemployment, but that achievement, too, was at great cost to Carter s popularity.
Fueling the inflationary spiral, and causing a crisis of its own, the price of fuel just kept going up. In March 1979, the nuclear reactor at Three Mile Island in central Pennsylvania	j
malfunctioned and the reactor core began to melt down. More than 100,000 Pennsylvania
residents were required to flee. The disaster led to a national fear and disdain against
nuclear energy. No new nuclear plants were built in the United States, leading to increased
Chapter 27 Rights, Reactioj^aiLimits 801
113
212
2/3
27.4
dependence on oil (see Map 27-2). However, oil was a volatile source of energy. The United States had long since ceased being able to produce all of the oil it needed and imported a significant amount from the Middle East (see Map 27-3). In the middle of Carter s energy crisis, OPEC increased the price of oil by 60 percent. Carter predicted that the move would cost 800,000 people their jobs in the United States. The immediate result was further inflation and very real shortages. Gas stations across the country simply ran out of gas. The public uproar was palpable, and much of the anger focused on the president.
At the end of June 1979, as Carter returned from foreign policy triumphs—the signing of the SALT II arms control agreement with the Soviet Union in Vienna and an economic summit in Tokyo, Japan—he received a call from his pollster and confidant Patrick Caddell who insisted that Carter come to Washington immediately, saying, “You have no idea how bad it is here.” The president cancelled a planned vacation in Hawaii and headed to Washington. After a 10-day retreat at Camp David, Carter spoke to the nation on July 15,1979, about what he saw as its “crisis of confidence.” It was a visionary statement, but it did not shorten the gas lines or improve Carter’s standing in the polls.
Some of Carter’s greatest early successes came in foreign policy, but foreign policy was also the arena of his greatest failures. He announced one of his goals in his short inaugural address: “We will move this year a step toward our ultimate goal—the elimination of all nuclear weapons from this earth.” To accomplish the goal, Carter sought to expand detente with the Soviet Union. He also meant to increase respect for human rights at home and abroad. Under Carter, there would be none of Henry Kissinger’s Realpolitik stances in foreign affairs that ignored human rights or democratic institutions. Early in his term, Carter took a number of steps in all of these directions. He quickly pardoned draft evaders from the Vietnam era. He halted production of the B-l bomber which was planned as a more advanced, and expensive, version of the B-52. He ended development of the neutron bomb. He also established full diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China, furthering the new relationship that Nixon had begun. In 1978, Carter won Senate ratification of treaties for the eventual turnover of the Panama Canal to the Republic of Panama. All of these moves brought harsh critiques, but most Americans supported them.
Greatest use of nuclear energy
eacn siaie generaxea oy nuclear
1__I None
□ 1-24%
SB8 25-50%
L..J
More than 50% Nuclear reactors in operation (In 2006, there were 104 nuclear power plants operating in 31 states.)
Hlo	-6k
	
	
U.S.
Electricity Generation by Energy Source, 2004 MAP 27-2 Nuclear Plants Around the United States. By 1980, the United States had 103 nuclear reactors that produced power for commercial use, supplying approximately 20 percent of the nation's electricity. After the crisis at Three Mile Island, that number would not grow.
802 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
3000	4000 Miles
—J	I
27.1
j
j 27 J
i
j 273
i
27.4



! 30°
WORLD'S LEADING OIL PRODUCERS
Percent of World Production 	1973	1977	1984
Leading OPEC			
producers			
Saudi Arabia	13	15	9
Iran	10	9	5
Venezuela	6	9	5
OPEC
Total 54 51 33 Soviet Union	16	18	22
United States	16	13	16
Mexico	1	2	5
i eo^±S
1150°
MAP 27-3 Oil-Producing Nations As the United States became more and more dependent on imported oil, it became deeply engaged with the sometimes unstable nations that produced the bulk of the world's supply.
Carter’s greatest foreign policy triumph was the signing of the Camp David Accords between Egypt and Israel in September 1978. Carter was determined to be a Middle East peacemaker. He visited both Egypt and Israel and then invited Menachem Begin of Israel and Anwar Sadat of Egypt to come to the presidential retreat at Camp David for 13 days in September 1978. Carter remembered, “The easy, gentle atmosphere was very helpful. It kept tensions down.” After some very tough negotiations, the leaders achieved a major breakthrough. The Camp David Accords included formal recognition of the state of Israel by Egypt while Israel agreed to return the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt.
Carter was dogged in his pursuit of detente with the Soviet Union. In June 1979, Carter negotiated the SALT II agreement that built on earlier agreements and placed a limit on the numbers of missiles and bombers each side would have. It was an important development; however, the effort at detente was undermined by events halfway around the world. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan to protect a beleaguered pro-Soviet government there. Carter saw the vastly expanded Soviet presence in Afghanistan as a violation of the decades-old American policy of containing Soviet communism. He ended the export of grain to the Soviet Union and ordered a U.S. boycott of the 1980 summer Olympic Games scheduled for Moscow. In spite of the fact that more than 60 other nations honored the Olympic boycott, it was a deep disappointment to athletes who had been preparing for years to compete. Carter s moves had hurt his popularity at home and had undermined his efforts toward detente.
Camp David Accords
An agreement between Israel and Egypt that brought mutual recognition between the countries and a step toward peace in the Middle East.
Chapter 27 Rights, Reactl
imits 803
Carter's greatest triumph was presiding over a new peace treaty between Anwar al-Sadat of Egypt and Menachem Begin of Israel.
Iranian hostage crisis
The invasion of the American embassy in Iran by revolutionary guards who then took 66 hostages, holding them from November 1979 until January 1981.
Carter’s worse foreign policy disaster, however, was with Iran. In January 1979, the government of the shah of Iran (who had been installed by a U.S.-backed coup in the 1950s) was overthrown. Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the exiled leader of the Muslim radicals, returned to Iran and created an Islamic Republic with a government that was based on religious law and that gave religious leaders like Khomeini ultimate authority. When in October the ailing shah was admitted to the United States for medical treatment, Khomeini and his followers were furious. On November 4, 1979, a mob stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, taking 66 Americans hostage.
The Iranian hostage crisis became the dominant event of Carter’s last year in office. The government froze Iranian assets in the United States, expanded the pressure on Iran, and tried every way possible to negotiate the release of the American hostages. In April 1980, feeling that negotiations were a failure, Carter approved an attack on Iran to rescue the hostages. The attack was a failure as a sandstorm and hydraulic problems disabled some of the helicopters and another crashed into a cargo plane. Eight Americans were killed but none got close to the hostages. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance resigned in protest. Later that year, after Iraq attacked Iran, the Iranian government agreed to negotiate but the process was slow. Only on the day Carter left office in January 1981, and after Reagan had taken the oath of office, were the hostages released.
The Coming of Ronald Reagan
Carter’s problems with the economy, energy, and hostages formed the backdrop to the 1980 election campaign. Within the Democratic Party there was great unease with the president. His cautious economic policies and determination to balance the federal budget alienated liberals. His go-it-alone style alienated Congress. Massachusetts Senator Edward “Ted” Kennedy challenged Carter in the primaries. Public opinion polls showed a two-to-one preference for Kennedy, last of the charismatic Kennedy brothers, over Carter. But Kennedy never seemed able to articulate the reasons he was challenging
804 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Carter. And for all of his popularity, memories persisted of the time in 1969 when Kennedy had driven a car off a bridge near Chappaquiddick on Marthas Vineyard and left a young woman, Mary Jo Kopechne, to drown. In the end, Carter defeated Kennedy for the nomination.
Kennedy supported Carter in the general election, but the wounds of a tough primary fight remained. Carter stayed close to the White House and focused on the hostage crisis. The president who once prided himself on his openness and accessibility now adopted a “Rose Garden Strategy,” leaving his office only rarely, even to campaign.
The Republicans entered the campaign with great confidence.
The contest for the nomination quickly came down to one between former California governor and movie actor, Ronald Reagan, and former CIA director and U.S. ambassador to China, George H.W.
Bush. Bush fought a tough campaign, calling Reagan’s economic plan ‘ voodoo economics.” But Reagan was hugely popular with conservatives who were known as the “Republican base.” He was also an effective and articulate campaigner and easily won the nomination.
Reagan named Bush as his running mate. Conservatives, who had felt
marginalized since Barry Goldwater’s loss in 1964, believed that their day had come. Reagan was an effective campaigner, impressing many with his sunny optimism. In the one presidential debate that was held, Reagan scored points with his poise and his response “There you go again” to a Carter critique. Reagan won in a landslide. The Republicans gained 34 seats in the House, though it still had a Democratic majority, but they took over the Senate with a 53 to 47 majority that included the defeat of Democratic stalwarts Frank Church of Idaho and George McGovern of South Dakota. The Democratic Speaker of the House, Tip O’Neill said of the election, “A tidal wave hit us.” Bill Moyers, who had served in the Johnson administration, said, “We didn’t elect this guy [Reagan] because he knows how many barrels of oil are in Alaska. We elected him because we want to feel good.” The 1980s and the time of the “Reagan Revolution” would be a very different one than the decade that had just ended.
Quick Review What could Ford and Carter have done to be more effective during their terms in office?
Blindfolded American hostages are paraded outside the U.S. Embassy in Teheran by their militant captors after Iranian students stormed the embassy in November, 1979. Sixty Americans and 40 nationals from other countries were taken by the students and held captive inside the embassy.
CONCLUSION
Public discourse in the United States, which had been heated in the 1960s, became even more divisive and angry after 1969. In the 1970s, new Civil Rights Movements emerged as women, gays and lesbians, Latinos, Asians, and American Indians began to demand equality and fair treatment. Against this expanding civil rights backdrop, a new conservative ideology surfaced, focusing on religion, morality, and culture. Compared with the 1950s and 1960s, the 1970s ushered in an economic downturn that undercut the security of many Americans. The 1970s also gave rise to political turmoil as one president was forced to resign in disgrace and two others lost their bids for reelection.
The new Civil Rights Movements of the 1970s resulted in advancements for many segments of the American population. Women achieved significant legislative and judicial victories, which allowed them to improve both their working conditions and their social status. Filipino and Mexican American farm workers successfully bargained for recognition of a union in California. American Indians staged protests at Alcatraz, Wounded Knee, and the offices of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, achieving modest gains with respect to civil rights and tribal autonomy. Gay and lesbian Americans began to step out of the closet, and the modern gay rights movement was born. At the same time, traditional conservatives were bewildered and angered by the
Chapter 27 Rights, React!
Its 805
rapidly shifting culture of the United States, and the so-called culture wars began. The “moral majority” organized a political response to repudiate both the civil rights agendas of the 1960s and 1970s and the Great Society legislation of Lyndon Johnson.
The Republican Party became increasingly conservative in the 1970s, but Richard Nixon was an inconsistent conservative at best. During Nixon’s tenure, Title IX was added to the Civil Rights Act, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration were created, and overall government spending to aid the poor rose significantly. On the international front, Nixon authorized a relentless bombing campaign against North Vietnam and secretly expanded the fighting into Cambodia. At the same time, Nixon sought to withdraw all ground troops from Vietnam. Despite the war in Vietnam, Nixon normalized relations with Communist China and successfully negotiated two treaties with the Soviets designed to reduce the supply of nuclear weapons. Ultimately, the Watergate scandal ended Nixon’s presidency. When Vice President Gerald Ford took office, he hoped to heal a wounded nation, but controversial domestic decisions and multiple foreign policy crises seriously damaged the effectiveness of his administration.
In 1976, Jimmy Carter, a little-known governor from Georgia was elected president. Carter successfully brokered a peace between Egypt and Israel. Nonetheless, ongoing economic problems at home—inflation, a high unemployment rate, and gas shortages—and his failure to secure the release of American hostages in Iran resulted in Carter’s stunning reelection defeat to Ronald Reagan in 1980.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How do you account for the political dissatisfaction with presidents Nixon, Ford, and Carter in the midst of so much change in the United States? What changes might have helped them? Which hurt the most?
806 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Chapter 27 Chapter Review
27.1
THE NEW POLITICS OF THE LATE
1960s__________________________ Explain Nixon's policies and politics, domestic and international.
Review Questions
1.	Crafting an Argument
In your opinion, how should Richard Nixon’s domestic record be characterized? As conservative? As liberal? In some other way?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Nixon and Johnson’s approaches to the war in Vietnam. How would you account for the differences you note?
3.	Contextualization
What did Nixon hope to gain by visiting China in 1972?
273
THE MOVEMENTS OF THE
1960s AND 1970s___________________ Analyze the many political and cultural movements that followed in the track of the Civil Rights movement.
Review Questions
4.	Comparison
What similarities and differences do you see between the African-American Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and early 1960s and the Civil Rights Movements launched by other group in the late 1960s and early 1970s? How did the fight for racial equality for African-Americans influence other movements?
5.	Chronological Reasoning
How did the struggle for African-American rights change over the course of the 1960s? Why did it change?
273
THE CULTURE WARS OF THE
1970s______________________________ Analyze the reaction to the liberal and radical politics of the 1960s and 1970s and the growth of new militant conservative movements.
Review Questions
6.	Historical Interpretation
What connections can you make between the defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment and the larger cultural and political trends of the 1970s?
7.	Contextualization
What role did religious organizations play in the conservative movement of the 1970s and 1980s? How did religious organizations both facilitate the rise of conservatives to political power and help redefine the conservative movement?
POLITICS, ECONOMICS, AND THE IMPACT OF WATERGATE
27.4
Explain the political impact of Watergate and subsequent developments that set the stage for the "Reagan Revolution."
Review Questions
8.	Chronological Reasoning
Why did the prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s give way to the economic downturn of the 1970s? Why did American political leaders find the economic problems of the 1970s so difficult to solve?
9.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the Ford and Carter presidencies. What challenges did both presidents face?
Chapter 27 Rights, Reaction, and Limits
PART
w Beginning
1980-to the Present
PART OUTLINE
