CHAPTER 8
Creating a New People, Expanding the Country, 1801-1823
Jefferson and the Republican Ideal
The Ideal of Religious Freedom
Beyond the Mississippi: The Louisiana Purchase and the Expedition of Lewis
The War of 1812
Expanding American Territory and Influence
CHAPTER 9
New Industries, New Politics, 1815-1828
Creating the Cotton Economy
Commerce, Technology, and Transportation
From the Era of Good Feeling to the Politics of Division
CHAPTER 10
Democracy in the Age of Jackson, 1828-1844
Jacksonian Democracy, Jacksonian Government
Democratized Religion:The Second Great Awakening
Democratized Education: The Birth of the Common School
CHAPTER 11
Manifest Destiny—Expanding the Nation, 1830—1853
Manifest Destiny—The Importance of an Idea
The U.S. War with Mexico, 1846-1848
West into the Pacific
8.1
8.2
83
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the post-Revolutionary generation created a new culture for the country while also expanding the land area of the United States.
JEFFERSON AND THE REPUBLICAN IDEAL
Explain how Jefferson's republicanism shaped and reflected the nation's democratic culture.
THE IDEAL OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM____________________
Explain how Americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith-based organizations supported, yet also challenged, Jeffersonian republicanism.
BEYOND THE MISSISSIPPI: THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE AND THE EXPEDITION OF LEWIS
Explain what effects the Louisiana Purchase and the westward expansion had on how Americans saw themselves.
THE WAR OF
1812 8.4
Analyze the causes and impact of the War of 1812.
8.5
EXPANDING AMERICAN TERRITORY AND INFLUENCE__________________________________
Analyze how the United States acquired new territory and increased influence abroad.
The Conestoga wagon pulled by a team of oxen—as shown here—or horses and pulling white settlers west became a symbol of the changing United States after 1800 as explorers and then settlers moved ever further toward the west, displacing the original inhabitants and building new communities.
On Inauguration Day, March 4, 1801, Thomas Jefferson had breakfast at his boardinghouse in Washington, D.C., and then walked up New Jersey Avenue to the unfinished Capitol building to take the oath of office as the nation’s third president. He was sworn in by one of his political archenemies, the Federalist Chief Justice John Marshall. In his inaugural address, Jefferson acknowledged the bitterness of the 1800 presidential campaign but continued:
But every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle.
We have called by different names brethren of the same principle.
We are all Republicans, we are all Federalists. If there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this Union or to change its republican form, let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
Federalist ideas, which were at the core of the Constitution and the first two presidential administrations, were increasingly out of touch with the democratic tone of the new century. As the new president made clear, more trust and less fear as well as dynamic exchanges and significant freedom were to characterize Jeffersonian democracy and his emerging Democratic-Republican Party.
Republican ideals and an explosion of interest in religion defined the politics and culture of Jeffersonian America. This chapter will examine these ideals and explore their effect on the growth of religious bodies as well as on the expansion and consolidation of American territory and power through the Louisiana Purchase, the War of 1812, and policies such as the Monroe Doctrine.
210 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
8.1
TABLE 8-1 Comparison of the First Political Parties: Federalists and Democratic-Republicans
JEFFERSON AND THE REPUBLICAN IDEAL
Explain how Jefferson's republicanism shaped and reflected the nation's democratic culture.
From the moment he took office, Jefferson set a new tone for the federal government. His inaugural address emphasized conciliation and national unity while his actions involved dramatic changes. Jefferson wanted to preside over a country in which social equality (among white male citizens) and individual freedom were the order of the day. The social hierarchies that had characterized the colonial era and the first years of the republic were, he thought, long out of date. He wanted a limited government that fostered the kind of freedom that was his ideal. Most of his countrymen, it seems, agreed.
Jefferson quickly sold the horses and coaches that John Adams had used. In place of formal state dinners, he held smaller dinner parties. What some called a “pell-mell” seating arrangement marked these gatherings at the White House. There was no assigned seating and no respect for the rank of the dignitaries who attended. The president simply sat down with whomever he found interesting and expected the other guests to do the same. A British diplomat described the new president as a host “with a most perfect disregard to ceremony both in his dress and manner” and vowed never to attend another White House dinner.
These changes in tone were not trivial. They represented what was quickly becoming the dominant ideology of the United States quite different from that of the Federalists: a commitment to a Democratic-Republican government but also republicanism in personal styles and political beliefs (see Table 9-1). Americans valued equality not only in terms of representation in government but also in terms of how Americans treated others—at state dinners in the White House, at town meetings, and in taverns and family homes. They also valued a notion of freedom in which a nation of independent farmers could make their own decisions, independent of one another if they preferred. American republicanism was a new way for citizens to relate to each other, emphasizing equality and independence far more than the class separation, deference, and dependence that had marked British North America and Great Britain itself.
Federalists
Originally organized by supporters of the Constitution
Although George Washington insisted he stood above party and hated the idea of political parties, he was usually considered to be a Federalist. The Federalists supported John Adams for president in the elections of 1796 and 1800.
The party wanted a strong national government, favored Hamilton's economic reforms, and generally supported stronger U.S. ties with Great Britain.
After the 1800 election, the Federalists never again dominated the national government but remained strong in New England for another 20 years. They nominated their last presidential candidate in 1816.
Democratic-Republicans
Began as an informal protest movement led by Jefferson and Madison in response to Hamilton's economic plans
By the 1796 and 1800 elections, Democratic-Republicans formed a well-defined caucus within the Congress, though hardly a modern political party. Between 1800 and 1820s, it was the nation's majority party—the Democratic-Republican Party—sometimes called the Jeffersonian Republican or simply the Republican Party.
The party sought a smaller federal government, wanted less federal involvement in economic matters, and generally favored France over Great Britain.
By the 1820s, it was the only remaining political party before splitting into the Democrats and the Whigs.
Significant Dates
8.1
1800	Thomas Jefferson elected president
1803	Louisiana Purchase
U.S.
Supreme Court's Marbury v. Madison decision Ohio admitted to the Union
1804-1806 Lewis and Clark Expedition
1807	Chesapeake-Leopard affair Congress passes Embargo Act
1808	James Madison elected president 1812-1815 War of 1812
1812	American defeat at Detroit
1813	American victories on Great Lakes and Battle of the Thames
Death ofTecumseh
1814	Jackson victory over Creeks at Battle of Horseshoe Bend
The British burn Washington, D.C.
Treaty of Ghent signed (ratified 1815)
1815	U.S. victory at Battle of New Orleans
1816	James Monroe elected president
1817	Rush-Bagot Treaty demilitarized the Great Lakes between the United States and Canada
1818	Anglo-American Convention set the border between the United States and Canada and included an agreement for temporary joint ownership of the Oregon Territory
1819	Adams-Onis Treaty—Spain cedes Florida to the United States
1822	Plans for slave revolt in Charleston led by Denmark Vesey
1823	Monroe Doctrine


republicanism
A complex, changing body of ideas, values, and assumptions that developed in the United States in the late 1790s and early 1800s around Thomas Jefferson and James Madison's political organizing and their campaigns for the presidency.
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 211
tariff
A tax on imports into any nation.
midnight judges
The name the Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans gave to those judges appointed by the outgoing Federalist president John Adams.
There are many ironies in Jefferson’s success. Jefferson, whose lack of religious orthodoxy was an issue in his campaigns, led the country during one of the great revivals of religion. Jefferson, the sophisticated aristocrat in his personal life, presided over White House events with a sense of informality that many officials found insulting. Jefferson, a slaveholder who had great misgivings about slavery, led the country during the time when slavery became stronger and more entrenched as well as a source of bitter divisiveness. And Jefferson, the believer in an agrarian vision of the United States, presided over a growing commercial economy that saw an expansion of U.S. territory as well as the rise of cities, banks, and corporations, which would have pleased his old rival Alexander Hamilton much more than it ever impressed Thomas Jefferson. The apparent disconnect between Jefferson the political leader and Jefferson the person generated much criticism but, those ironies also reflected the dramatic changes afloat in the nation.
Jefferson the Political Leader
Jefferson’s changes in the government went far beyond symbolism. He shrank the federal bureaucracy while doubling the landmass of the United States. Jefferson thought the bureaucracy he had inherited from John Adams was “too complicated, too expensive” and vowed to cut it, though that government was hardly a large one. The largest federal office, the War Department, included the secretary of war, one accountant, 14 clerks, and two messengers. The secretary of state had one chief clerk, six other clerks, and a messenger. The attorney general did not even have a clerk. Still, Jefferson thought it was too big and cut it. In addition, having always feared the impact of a standing army, he cut the size of the army in the west and the size of the navy that patrolled the Atlantic Ocean. He founded the military academy at West Point only because he wanted to replace Federalist officers with a thoroughly professional (and Republican) officer corps. Jefferson’s secretary of the treasury persuaded him to keep Hamilton’s Bank of the United States, but Jefferson was never enthusiastic about the bank, and a Republican Congress refused to renew its charter in 1811, after he had left office.
While he kept the tariff—the tax on imported goods—Jefferson abolished all internal taxes. Most Americans dealt with the federal government only through the post office during the Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe administrations. Washington, D.C., had fewer than 10,000 residents, most of whom lived in boardinghouses. A British diplomat described it as a capital city “like no other in the world” where one could get stuck in the mud on Pennsylvania Avenue, and a carriage had to avoid tree stumps and grazing cows, but there was “excellent snipe [a type of game bird] shooting.. .close under the wall of the Capitol.” Jefferson liked it that way. He wanted a small federal government. For Jefferson, the states, not the federal government, were supposed to have the “principal care of our persons, our property, and our reputation.”
One of Jefferson’s early efforts to shrink the federal government sparked one of the most significant Supreme Court decisions in U.S. history. The new Jeffersonian majority in Congress repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801, which had expanded the number of federal judges and which John Adams had signed just before leaving office. Following Jefferson’s views, Congress wanted fewer federal judges, and it especially disliked the Federalist judges that Adams had appointed in his last days in office, which some called midnight judges because of the hour at which the outgoing president appointed them. Congressional leaders and President Jefferson virtually dared the Supreme Court, particularly, Chief Justice Marshall, a Federalist whom Adams had appointed, to declare Congress’s actions unconstitutional. They promised that if the Court did so, Congress would reduce the Court s authority. But Marshall was a wily judge. He waited for the right case to make his decision. One of the many last-minute court appointments that Adams had made was to name William Marbury a justice of the peace for the District of Columbia. But Adams left office before Marbury’s commission was delivered, and President Jefferson and his secretary of state, James Madison, refused to
212
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
deliver it. Marbury sued, and in 1803, the Supreme Court, led by John Marshall, issued its decision in the case of Marbury v. Madison.
Marbury v. Madison was a complex decision with far-reaching consequences. Marshall began by saying that Jefferson had, indeed, been irresponsible in failing to deliver the commission, for even a president “cannot at his discretion sport away the vested rights of others.” However, Marshall also said, the Court could do nothing because the clause in the Judiciary Act of 1789 giving the federal courts the right to issue writs requiring governmental action was unconstitutional because the Constitution did not give the judiciary such authority. The result of the ruling was three-fold. First, Marbury did not get his job. Second, while the Court slapped Jefferson’s wrist, it also gave him the legal victory in the case because he was not forced to appoint Marbury, and his party’s overturning of the Judiciary Act of 1801 stood. Since Jefferson had won, there was nothing in the Court decision for him to challenge. But third, Marshall also made a point of saying that the Court had the authority to declare an act of Congress unconstitutional. It was the first time the Court asserted this power of judicial review. The Court would not use this power to determine the constitutionality of an act of Congress again until 1857, long after Marshall was gone, but Marshall had dramatically expanded the authority of the federal courts while also ensuring that they would not be challenged by Jefferson or the Republican Congress.
Marbury v. Madison
Supreme Court decision of 1803 that created the precedent of judicial review by ruling part of the Judiciary Act of 1789 as unconstitutional.
8.1
judicial review
A power implied in the Constitution that gives federal courts the right to review and determine the constitutionality of acts passed by Congress and state legislatures.
Rural America and the Agrarian Ideal
In 1801, the occupations, opinions, and manners of most American voters were
compatible with Jefferson’s agrarian ideal of a nation of independent farmers, and they
provided a solid foundation on which to build political consensus. Ihe population of
the United States when Jefferson took office was just over 5.3 million, almost 900,000
of whom were African slaves. Ninety percent of whites lived on farms.
However, far from being permanently attached to their isolated rural communities, many moved often, seeking more and better land in Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
Older farms were sold and resold regularly. A French observer, the Due de La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, visited the United States just before Jefferson’s inauguration.
He wondered whether American farmers had any of the French peasant’s attachment to a particular piece of land, but when he asked the Americans, they said that such attachments represented a lack of pluck. So he wrote, “It is a country in flux.. .that which is true today as regards its population, its establishments, its prices, its commerce will not be true six months from now.”
For many in the Republic, all forms of authority, in government and in manners, were suspect. Republican virtue was to be found in equality, at least among white men.
While voting restrictions related to race and gender continued, and even grew in the early 1800s, virtually all property qualifications for voting disappeared, and many people now wanted to vote. As a result, the number of voters, which had previously included around 20 percent of the white male population, expanded in most states to 70 and 80 percent. Compared to any earlier era, the white male electorate was large. It was also opinionated and individualistic.
European visitors were fascinated and appalled by the manners and morals of Americans. An Englishman, Charles William Janson, who lived in the United States from 1793 to 1806, called Americans “the only remaining republicans in the civilized world,” but he also found them “in every respect uncongenial to English habits, and to the tone of an Englishman’s constitution.” Everyone in the United States, Janson said, from the poorest and least educated to the most elite, “consider themselves on an equal footing with the best educated people in the country.
The United States of the early 1800s was also a violent place. Political arguments were often settled with fists. Urban riots were not unusual when crowds poured out of a tavern, theater, or factory. Observers worried that the country was losing its cohesion. Fighting was as common in rural communities. Daniel Drake, who grew up
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 213
8.1
During Jefferson's time in office, the nation's capital in Washington, D.C., was little more than a sleepy village along the shores of the Potomac River. Jefferson liked it that way, as a symbol of a weak federal government.

in Kentucky and became one of the leading citizens of Cincinnati, described his childhood home in the early 1800s as a place where men fought with “no holds barred” using hands, feet, and teeth and “scratching, pulling hair, choking, gouging out each other’s eyes, and biting off each other’s noses.”
Men of higher social standing often settled minor grudges with a duel. Jefferson’s Vice President Aaron Burr, who never forgave his longtime political rival former Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton for his role in the final outcome of the 1800 election, later challenged him to a duel in response to unkind comments Hamilton made. Hamilton agreed as a point of honor, and Burr killed him in the resulting fight in 1804. Long before he became president in 1829, Andrew Jackson was shot in a duel over a bet on a horserace in Tennessee in 1806. He carried that bullet in his chest for the rest of his life; his opponent was killed in the encounter.
One cause of the violence was the high level of alcohol consumption. Most Americans with access to alcohol—which did not include slaves—enjoyed a drink during the colonial era. But in the early 1800s, drinking doubled from an average of 2.5 gallons per person per year in 1790, to five gallons in 1820. One doctor complained that 40 of the 100 physicians in New York City were drunks. Charles Janson reported his “horror” at “boys, whose dress indicated wealthy parents, intoxicated, shouting and swearing in the public streets.” Another observer estimated that some workers were consuming a quart of hard liquor every day.
The violence, lack of manners, and “shouting and swearing” were not limited to duels among the elite or fist fights on the frontier. Interracial violence between white Americans and Indians continued long after the Indian Wars in the east had ended. Individual Indians were easy marks for attack. Similarly, slaves could do little to protect themselves against the violence that was always a part of the slave system. The i beating, rape, even killing of slaves was seldom considered a matter of concern for anyone but those on the plantation.
Family life, too, was not exempt from violence. When a New Yorker, Stephen Arnold, was tried for the murder of his adopted daughter, many saw it as government intrusion into a family matter. But while violence toward wives and children may have increased, it was also resisted as it had not been earlier. Divorce rates increased as women refused to stay in violent or unhappy marriages or remain legally connected to a man who had left them long before.
214 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
k
Jefferson built a grand home, Monticello, for himself and his family, near Charlottesville, Virginia. Slave laborers expanded the house according to Jefferson's plans and attended to his personal needs.
Jefferson the Individual
While Americans debated the many meanings of freedom and unfreedom in the democratic experiment of which they were a part, they also debated the personal life of their president and whether he was himself a good example of the ideals he espoused.
While Jefferson insisted on a simplified social scene at the White House, his life at his grand house in Monticello was anything but. At Monticello, he entertained lavishly and served the finest food and wine, while continually expanding the house and the library. Slaves did all of the hard work and took care of the president’s every need. The defender of republican equality in social relations lived an aristocratic private life.
The president’s private life became national news soon after he took office. On September 1, 1802, the Richmond Recorder, edited by James Callendar, a former Jefferson ally-turned-enemy, carried a story that began, “It is well known that the man, whom it delighteth the people to honor, keeps, and for many years has kept, as his concubine, one of his slaves. Her name is SALLY.” Thus did rumors of Thomas Jefferson’s longtime relationship with his slave, Sally Hemings, become national news. Not everyone believed the story, and Jefferson remained silent, but his opponents used the story of his life with Sally Hemings and the birth of their children to smear the president. The Federalists made a major issue of the relationship when Jefferson ran for reelection in 1804. He still won easily, but the rumors persisted long after he died and Hemings’s children were free. With the advent of DNA testing in the late 1990s, it has been established as highly likely that the children of Sally Hemings, four of whom survived into adulthood and were set free, were also the children of Thomas Jefferson. Although not without debate, this conclusion is the consensus of most historians who have studied Jefferson’s life.
3 Quick Review Jefferson called his election the “Revolution of 1800." Considering the changes in the government during his administration, do you agree with him? Why or why not?
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 215
SJ
8.2
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings



As a young man, Jefferson married Martha Wayles Skelton, like himself a wealthy young Virginian. Martha Jefferson died at Monticello in 1782, and Jefferson never remarried. In 1787, a 16-year-old slave, Sally Hemings, who was the half-sister of Jefferson's wife Martha by her slave-owning father, became a servant in Jefferson's Paris home while he was ambassador to France. When Jefferson returned to the United States in 1789, Hemings could have stayed in France and been free by French law, but she returned with him. While much is not known about their relationship, Jefferson seems to have promised Hemings that he would free the children of their union. Hemings and many of her family lived at Monticello near the older children from Jefferson's marriage. Sally Hemings's last child was born there in 1808, and Hemings stayed at Jefferson's home until he died in 1826, when she went to live with her own free children.
In her book, The Hemingses of Monticello: An American Family
(New York: W. W. Norton, 2008), historian Annette Gordon-Reed traces not only the story of Sally Hemings, but the story of the
intertwined generations of the Jefferson and Hemings families. The story raises many questions for historians, including questions about the relevance of Jefferson's personal relationship with Sally Hemings in terms of judgments about his political career and as president.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
Was it possible for a slave woman and a powerful older free man who claimed ownership of her to form a truly consensual relationship? Why or why not?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What bearings might Jefferson's relationship with Sally Hemings have on his complex attitudes about the institution of slavery? What does an understanding of Jefferson's family with Sally Hemings and her family tell us about the nature of American slavery and society in the early 1800s?

III
THE IDEAL OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
8.2
Explain how Americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith-based organizations supported, yet also challenged, Jeffersonian republicanism.
i
On his first New Year’s Day in the White House, Thomas Jefferson wrote to the members of a committee of the Danbury, Connecticut, Baptist Association:
Believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between man and his God, that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship, that the legislative powers of government reach actions only, and not opinions,
I contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole American people which declared that their legislature should “make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,” thus building a wall of separation between Church and State.
wall of separation between church and state
A phrase coined by Thomas Jefferson to make clear his belief that the First Amendment to the Constitution guaranteed that governments should not interfere with the work of churches, and churches should not interfere with, or expect support from, government.
With the wide distribution of that letter, the “wall of separation between church and state” became part of the American lexicon. Some have pointed out that the “wall of separation” is merely a phrase coined by one president and not part of the Constitution or law of the land. They are right. But in 1802, Jefferson was expressing another aspect of the republican ideal. More and more Americans believed that two of the most important arenas of American life—politics and religion—should stay as far away from each other as possible. People who wanted to be treated equally with everyone else, no matter what their wealth or family; who wanted to be free to curse, drink, and fight without the law’s intrusion; and who wanted to be left alone on their own farms also wanted to be able to pursue their religious beliefs as they chose.
A decade before Jefferson wrote to the Connecticut Baptists, President George Washington had written to the Sephardic Jewish congregation in Newport, Rhode Island, expressing similar views (see Chapter 7). Like the letter that Washington
and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land,
wrote, Jefferson s letter was written to a specific audience, but unlike Washington, Jefferson sought a change in government policy—specifically state government policy in New England.
In 1802, when he wrote the letter, Connecticut was one of four states that still had an official, state-supported church, a so-called “religious establishment.” Connecticut required all of its citizens, including its Baptists and nonbelievers, to pay taxes to support the state’s Congregational churches, as did New Hampshire and Massachusetts. Maryland required support for the Episcopal Church. When it was adopted in 1791, the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, indeed all of the Bill of Rights amendments, applied only to the federal government. States could do as they pleased in church-state matters. Only after the Civil War was the reach of the Bill of Rights broadened. Long before the Revolution, all of the states had stopped requiring church attendance or prosecuting people for heresy, but the clergy in the four states of Connecticut, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and Maryland were still civil servants supported by the state government. Some of the governed, including Connecticut’s Baptists and Maryland’s Catholics, resented paying a tax that benefited other religious bodies but not their own. So in the 1802 letter, Jefferson was telling these Connecticut Baptists just what they wanted to hear. Not surprisingly, some of the Congregational leaders in Connecticut did not agree.
The Separation of Church and State at the State Level
Jefferson, along with James Madison, had convinced the Virginia legislature to end public financial support for the Episcopal Church in that state in 1786, 5 years before Madison helped shepherd the First Amendment through Congress. That victory had not been an easy one.
The fiercest battle over state support for specific churches, however, was fought in Connecticut. Timothy Dwight, who became president of Yale in 1795, was a firm Federalist who hated Jefferson’s republicanism and who could not imagine good government or moral citizens without a state church. One of Dwight’s students at Yale, Lyman Beecher, organized the Connecticut Society for the Suppression of Vice and the Promotion of Good Morals and published The Connecticut Evangelical Magazine and Religious Intelligencer in an effort to maintain the special status of the Congregationalist churches. But he lost. In 1817, Oliver Wolcott, who opposed a state-supported church in Connecticut, defeated a Federalist for governor, and Connecticut would end its state support for all religious bodies. Beecher was heartbroken. Years later, however, he changed his mind:
The injury done to the cause of Christ, as we then supposed, was irreparable.
For several days I suffered what no tongue can tell for the best thing that ever happened to the State of Connecticut. ...By voluntary efforts, societies, missions, and revivals, they [clergy] exert a deeper influence than ever they could by queues, and shoe-buckles, and cocked hats, and gold-headed canes.
Religion in Connecticut, as Beecher noted, actually survived and flourished without state support and, not long afterward, Massachusetts, the last holdout, followed the same path to separate church and state.
New Religious Expressions
Direct government support for churches disappeared in the early 1800s, but the importance of religious freedom did not. The ideals of individual freedom in all areas of life generated an amazing growth in religious organizations and ideas in the same era.
Church attendance in America dropped during and after the Revolution. Many of the elite, like Jefferson, were deists who saw God as, at most, a distant force in human affairs; many working people ignored religious matters altogether. During Jefferson’s presidency, however, Americans participated in an outpouring of evangelical
religious establishment
The name given to a state-church or to the creation of an "established church" that might play a role in, and expect support and loyalty from, all citizens.
deist
One who has a religious orientation that rejects divine revelation and holds that the workings of nature alone reveal God's design for the universe.
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 217
ft4 I
Second Great Awakening
A series of religious revivals in the first half of the 1800s characterized by great emotionalism in large public meetings.
i
This popular illustration of an early camp meeting gives some sense of what went on at a camp meeting, though especially in the west, the crowds who attended were larger and more diverse than indicated here.

Christianity—the beginning of the Second Great Awakening. This religious revival paralleled and, indeed, exceeded the Great Awakening of the 1740s that had transformed American Christianity. Although major developments of the Second Great Awakening occurred largely in the 1820s and 1830s, the movement began in the late 1790s and the early 1800s.
Cane Ridge and the Revivals of the Early 1800s
In 1796, a Presbyterian minister named James McGready moved from the Carolinas to Kentucky. Most of those who had moved across the Appalachian Mountains into Kentucky had left their religion at home, if they ever had any at all. McGready described “Rogues Harbor” in Logan County, Kentucky, as a place of horse thieves, murderers, robbers, counterfeiters, and runaways. They were the same people whom Daniel Drake had described as fighting with “no holds barred.” McGready set out to make them good church-going Christians. He was surprisingly successful. In 1799, he and other preachers held a church service at the Gaspar River Meeting House. John McGee, one of the others involved, remembered, “I left the pulpit and went through the audience shouting and exhorting with all possible ecstasy and energy, and the floor was soon covered with the slain.” (Revivalist preachers often called those who experienced emotional conversion “the slain” because they were seen as having died to their old, sinful lives.)
The revival of 1799 led to more religious gatherings, and they grew so big that they needed to be held at outdoor campgrounds. In one of the largest religious gatherings before the Civil War, perhaps 20,000 people—10 percent of the state’s population-gathered at Cane Ridge in Bourbon County, Kentucky, for a 5-day camp meeting in August 1801 that was led by Presbyterian and Methodist ministers. Preaching continued from dawn to midnight with little time for meals or rest. James Finley, who was himself converted to Christianity at the Cane Ridge Camp Meeting and went on to a long career as a frontier revivalist, described the days:
I counted seven ministers all preaching at once, some on stumps, others in wagons, and one...was standing on a tree trunk which had, in falling, lodged against another. Some of the people were singing, others praying, some crying.
Barton W. Stone, the pastor of the Cane Ridge Presbyterian Church that hosted the gathering, remembered, “Many things transpired there, which were so much like miracles, that if they were not, they had the same effect as miracles on infidels and unbelievers.”
Methodists, Baptists, and Other Protestants
Although Cane Ridge was a joint Presbyterian-Methodist endeavor, it was the Methodists and Baptists who grew the most from the revival movement. Indeed, the revivals that began in the early 1800s made these two denominations the largest Protestant groups in the country during that time.
Methodism had come to America through John Wesley (1703-1791), who founded the Methodist movement in England along with his brother, Charles, the hymn writer (1707-1788). John Wesley had also preached in Georgia. But
it was the first American Methodist Bishop, Francis Asbury (1745-1816), who established American Methodism. Asbury created a new form of Protestant ministry, the Methodist circuit riders, who moved from community to community preaching with great fervor and organizing churches at every stop.
218 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
John Wesley believed that it was in the power of every person to decide whether they wanted to experience salvation. His emphasis on the need for free individuals to make their own decisions appealed in freedom-loving Jeffersonian America. In addition, Wesley s experience of having his “heart strangely warmed” allowed a level of emotionalism in Methodism that was lacking in other denominations.
Baptists had been in North America for almost as long as the Puritans. They were the largest religious body in Rhode Island, where they founded Brown University. The Baptists of the Second Great Awakening, however, were a different breed from their earlier, New England Baptist counterparts. Their religious events were more emotional, and they were more individualistic and determined to assert local authority.
Where Methodism was tightly organized from bishops to preachers to congregations, Baptist organization was highly decentralized, with each congregation retaining total control. While Methodists were largely united until the coming of the Civil War, Baptists tended to splinter into rival groups—Regular Baptists, Anti-Mission Baptists, Freewill Baptists, Church of God Baptists, Seventh-Day Baptists, Six-Principle Baptists, Hard Shell Baptists. The model Methodist minister was the circuit rider; the typical Baptist minister was a farmer-preacher who grew up in a particular congregation and was selected to lead it while he continued to support himself by his own labor. Despite their differences, however, both the Methodist and the Baptist ministers were highly effective in changing the religious outlook of the country after 1800.
Faith in the Slave Quarters and Free Black Churches
White communities were not the only ones experiencing a revival of religion in the early 1800s. At revivals like Cane Ridge, blacks and whites, whether slaves or free people, mixed with surprising freedom. Revivals in some parts of the South, especially in the early 1800s, were seen as a kind of holiday, and many of the rules of daily life, including racial segregation, were suspended.
Many plantation owners organized religious services for slaves that focused on the virtues of submission and obedience. But slaves passed along memories of another form of worship—congregations that met, often at night in secluded places. The scholar and activist W.E.B. Dubois (1868-1963) described the meetings of these clandestine congregations as occasions to speak of “the longing and disappointment and resentment of a stolen people” and about their deep passion for liberty.
Litt Young, a slave on a plantation near Vicksburg, Mississippi, remembered that the mistress of the plantation
built a nice church with glass windows and a brass cupola for the blacks. A yellow man [a light-skinned African-American] preached to us. She had him preach how we was to obey our master and missy if we want to go to heaven, but when she wasn’t there, he come out with straight preachin’ from the Bible.
Clara Young recalled her favorite preacher was a man named Matthew Ewing who, even though he could not read or write, “sure knowed his Bible.” For these slaves, effective preaching involved knowing the Bible, either by memory or from the rare— and illegal—ability to read it, and an ability to preach with passion about freedom in the next life and quite possibly in this life. Worship included singing, dancing, and a cathartic emotional release and renewal.
Any unsupervised meeting of slaves frightened whites. Denmark Vesey, a free black Sunday school teacher who saw himself as a latter-day Moses, ready to lead his people to freedom, led a slave revolt in South Carolina in 1822. In 1831, Nat Turner would lead the largest slave revolt before the Civil War. When Turner told the
8 A
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 219
i
84
.. ,.....
83
authorities that he knew he “was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of the Almighty,” and that “the great day of judgment was at hand, he confirmed what they had been fearing about slave religion.
The longing for freedom usually took less violent paths, however. Slavery depended on hopelessness, and religion gave slaves hope that could lead to resistance. The songs of the slave quarter are often songs of freedom. Thus slaves sang:
Steal away, steal away, steal away to Jesus!
Steal away, steal away home, I ain’t got long to stay here!
Sometimes these lyrics meant stealing away to the religious meeting, but they could also mean stealing away from slavery to flee North.
At the same time, northern free blacks began to form their own religious orga- j nizations. Richard Allen was born a slave in Delaware. He converted to Methodism and was able to purchase his freedom and begin preaching. Although Allen preached to white and black congregations, he “soon saw a large field open in seeking and instructing my African brethren, who had been a long forgotten people and few of them attended public worship.”
Because white churches were not always welcoming, Allen became convinced that a racially integrated congregation was impossible. In response, he organized the Bethel Church in Philadelphia in 1794. Thus was born the African Methodist Episcopal Church, which by 1820 had 4,000 members in Philadelphia and 2,000 more in Baltimore. Other black Methodists founded the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in New York. African-American Baptists also created their own congregations. Fears of religiously inspired slave rebellions, especially after Denmark Vesey’s rebellion of 1822, led southern governments to block the growth of independent black churches, but in the North, free black churches thrived as their members exercised leadership, developed their own ideas, and worshipped among themselves.
American Catholic and Jewish Communities
In the early years of the Republic, there were few Roman Catholics or Jews in the areas of the original 13 colonies. During the late 1700s and early 1800s, the largest number of Catholics in North America lived in New Orleans, which had become part of the United States only in 1803, and in Texas, New Mexico, and California, which were still part of Mexico until the 1840s. Nearly all white immigrants to the British colonies had been at least nominally Protestant, except for Catholics who had been granted safe haven in Maryland. Religious freedom in the Jeffersonian era was tremendously important to those who were in the smallest minorities. The freedom to form their own religious organizations, free of government control and often free of full authority by their own senior leaders, was important to Catholics and Jews in Jeffersonian America.
In 1790, John Carroll was appointed the first Catholic bishop in America. He was based in Maryland, where Catholics, having lost their right to govern the colony, had again gained religious freedom after the Revolution (see Chapter 7). Carroll was later promoted to Archbishop of Baltimore when the Vatican appointed bishops for Boston, New York, and Bardstown, Kentucky. Carroll worked hard to build Catholic strength and to fit into the democratic spirit of America. He established the first American Catholic college at Georgetown, Maryland (later part of the District of Columbia), and a Catholic seminary at Baltimore. In many places, Catholic laypeople created their own churches, appointed themselves trustees, and when possible hired their own priests. Vatican responses to the radical secularism of the French Revolution led to pressure on Carroll to curtail this trend among the American laity and, instead, agree
220 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
to the hierarchical appointment of priests, but throughout the early 1800s, American Catholicism had remarkably strong lay leadership.
At the time of the Revolution, most of the few American Jews lived in East Coast cities such as Newport, Philadelphia, and New York City. Between then and 1820, new congregations and synagogues were formed in Richmond, New Orleans, Cincinnati, and Baltimore. Jewish religious communities, like those of Catholics and Protestants, took on republican sentiments. In New York City, Congregation Shearith Israel adopted the words Whereas in free states all power originates and is derived from the people” as the beginning words to their new congregational constitution.
Q
Quick Review How does this trend toward religious freedom epitomize the republican values of the Jefferson administration? BEYOND THE MISSISSIPPI: THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE AND THE EXPEDITION OF LEWIS AND CLARK
83
Explain what effects the Louisiana Purchase and the westward expansion had on how Americans saw themselves.
Jefferson was a political philosopher committed to a small federal government and religious freedom, but he was also a pragmatic politician. One of the practical issues that he faced in leading a country of independent farmers was that those farmers living in western regions were not happy.
Geography shaped American politics at the beginning of Jefferson’s term in office. Before the advent of railroads, farmers west of the Alleghenies found it very difficult to ship their goods over the mountains to the Atlantic coast or transport them down the Mississippi through New Orleans. These difficulties had helped fuel the Whiskey Rebellion and the short-lived effort to make Kentucky the independent nation of Franklin during Washington’s administration (see Chapter 7), and Jefferson worried that frustrated frontier farmers might still seek to form an independent country, as some of them advocated to do. He also worried about European influence still among them and knew that having many unhappy citizens was not good for the future of a sitting president. He was determined to do something about it.
French explorers were the first Europeans to reach and settle the banks of the Mississippi River, and most European influences in the region were still French, reflected in French place names from Detroit to Saint Louis to New Orleans. However, at the close of the French and Indian War in 1763, France ceded to Spain the area west of the Mississippi and the city of New Orleans. Throughout the Washington and Adams administrations and into Jefferson’s, in spite of the provisions of the Pinckney Treaty, Spain periodically restricted non-Spanish vessels from sailing on the Mississippi and collected customs duties on all goods moving through New Orleans. That practice was detrimental because more than half of all the goods shipped out of the United States were shipped down the Mississippi River and through the port of New Orleans, not Atlantic ports. By 1800, Spain had become weaker, prompting Jefferson to write that Spanish control of the river and New Orleans “would hardly be felt by us.”
However, Napoleon Bonaparte, who now ruled France, negotiated a secret treaty with Spain to return New Orleans and the entire Louisiana Territory to France. When word of the treaty reached the United States in 1802, it provoked a crisis. Jefferson believed that for France, then the strongest nation in Europe, to control American commerce was intolerable. The president told the American ambassador in Paris,
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 221
Louisiana Purchase
The 1803 U.S. purchase of the vast land holdings that France claimed along the west side of the Mississippi River beginning in New Orleans and extending through the heart of North America to the Canadian border.
“There is on the globe one single spot, the possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy.” That spot was New Orleans.
The Louisiana Purchase
The solution for more secure commerce, Jefferson thought, was to buy the city of New Orleans from France. Once the port was under American control, Jefferson was confident that he would have solved a long-term problem for his western constituents and won an important political victory. Jefferson dispatched two of his most trusted associates, James Monroe and Robert Livingston, to Paris to offer $6 million for the city. If they could not reach an accommodation with the French, Monroe was to proceed to London and try to make an alliance against France with Great Britain.
While Jefferson worried about control of New Orleans, Napoleon had worries of his own. Although he was victorious on the European continent, Napoleon needed money. In addition, French efforts to put down the slave uprising in Haiti had gone terribly. Militant slave resistance and yellow fever had killed 24,000 French soldiers, and Haitian independence seemed inevitable. New Orleans and the Mississippi Valley, which supplied Haiti with food and raw materials, would become much less important to France if France no longer controlled the Haitian sugar and coffee plantations. So when the Americans offered $6 million for one city, Napoleon’s government offered to sell the whole middle third of the present-day United States for $15 million.
Jefferson was thrilled with Napoleon’s offer. He worried, however, that a strict reading of the Constitution did not authorize the federal government to make such a huge purchase of land; it certainly did not mention that authority in the powers granted to the national government. Nevertheless, the practical political benefits of the Louisiana Purchase overcame his constitutional doubts. Some Federalists in Congress opposed the purchase, fearing—correctly—that the influence of New England—the last Federalist region of the country—would be diminished in a vastly larger nation. But most Americans, even most Federalists, were enthusiastic. Congress acted quickly, and the treaty confirming the transfer of 828,000 square miles from nominal French control to the United States was easily ratified. The United States had solved the problem of New Orleans and secured control of both sides of the Mississippi River from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico, while almost doubling the nation’s land area. How to incorporate this land into the United States, whether as states or territories, would be left for future administrations to determine.
The City of New Orleans
New Orleans was unusual for an American city when it became part of the United States in 1803. Many of its inhabitants spoke French or Spanish, but they now lived in a country where business was conducted in English. It was a Catholic city that was now part of an overwhelmingly Protestant country. Its citizens were a cosmopolitan mix with attitudes toward many things—including race and sexuality—that were different from those of most Americans.
Slavery in Spanish and French colonies varied widely. Some of the harshest slavery in the world was in the sugar plantations of French Haiti and in Spanish Cuba. But slaves in cities like Havana and pre-1803 New Orleans could maintain stable families, enjoy their own holidays, and earn money to buy goods for themselves and, sometimes, even their freedom. In New Orleans, slaves and free blacks could gather at Congo Square on Sundays to dance, play drums, and sing in their own languages under the watchful eye of whites but with a freedom of action unimaginable elsewhere in the United States. The music that they brought from Africa and developed in New Orleans was the foundation of American jazz music.
There was also considerable racial mixing in New Orleans. Mixed-race people faced discrimination, but many black women nonetheless became long-term partners to white men. Indeed, such unions were an avenue of upward mobility for some black
222 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
women, not only in New Orleans but also in many of the Spanish and French colonies in ways that were not true in British colonies or in the United States. That African women could maintain their own gardens, buy and sell goods, and be involved in intimate relationships with white men led to complex family negotiations. A libre (as free blacks were called) woman, Carlota d’Erneville, purchased her freedom in 1773 and the freedom of her son Carlos in 1775. She later became rich enough to own her own tavern and houses that she rented to others.
Ihe New Orleans that Jefferson purchased in 1803 had a population of 8,000 with their own churches, dance halls, theater, newspapers, and police force. One-third of all people of African origin in the city were free compared with less than two percent in nearby Kentucky or Tennessee and under 10 percent in the United States as a whole.
Many of the French-speaking women and men of New Orleans, black or white, slave or free, tended to refer to any citizens of the United States as “Kaintucks” or Kentuckians—no matter where in the United States they came from. Kaintucks were the tough backwoods farmers and slaves who crewed flatboats. These large floating rafts, often 15 feet wide by 50- to 80-feet long, carried up to 100 tons of grain. For the Americans who came down the Mississippi on a flatboat, New Orleans was a city of pleasure that lured many to stay and create a new American population. Although the racial and cultural diversity of New Orleans frightened some Americans, its essential geographic location made it the prize of the Louisiana Purchase.
The Lewis and Clark Expedition
Jefferson wanted to assert American dominance in North America. In 1803, before he even knew the outcome of the Monroe-Livingston negotiations for New Orleans that he had authorized, he asked Congress to support a “scientific expedition” to study the people, lands, and animal and plant species of the North American continent across the Louisiana territory and on to the Pacific Ocean. While he wanted the scientific information, Jefferson was even more interested in a full report on Spanish and French military power in the region. The expedition was to be led by his private secretary, Meriwether Lewis, and an army officer, William Clark. Before Lewis and Clark could depart, word came of the Louisiana Purchase. Suddenly, the United States owned much of the land the expedition was authorized to explore. Ihe news changed nothing; the order still stood: learn as much as possible about the new American lands and the places beyond them, and make treaties with as many of the original inhabitants as possible. It was a daunting assignment that would become one of American history’s most celebrated exploits.
Lewis and Clark and their Corps of Discovery—the team of soldiers, civilian woodsmen, boatmen, interpreters, and Clark’s slave York—prepared for the trip during the winter of 1803-04 in St. Louis on the west bank of the Mississippi River. The site was a Spanish/French trading post of about a thousand people, which was a gateway to the territory the United States had just acquired. French explorers were familiar with much of the land over which the expedition would travel, as was a British trader, Alexander Mackenzie, who had been the first European to cross North America in 1792-93. Of course, the Indians living along the route knew their homelands well. Still, for Americans, this vast area was unknown land. On May 14, 1804, the Corps of Discovery left Camp River Dubois in Hartford, Illinois, to travel up the Missouri River into the heart of the Louisiana Territory. By the end of October, they reached an area close to the current U.S.-Canadian border in North Dakota. There, near a Mandan Indian village on the Missouri River, they made camp for the winter. The Mandans lived in earth lodges in settled villages. They had traded with the French for over a hundred years, had been decimated by European smallpox, and knew European ways, but the arrival of the Lewis and Clark expedition was their first contact with Americans. The Americans traded goods and celebrated feasts, including New Year’s Day, with the Mandans, drinking, dancing, and playing the fiddle to the surprise of their hosts.
In 1803 President Thomas Jefferson sent James Monroe and Robert R. Livingstone to Paris to negotiate the American purchase of the city of New Orleans. In their meeting with the French foreign minister Charles Maurice de Talleyrand, shown in this contemporary engraving, the French offered, and the Americans accepted, the transfer of the entire Louisiana Territory to the United States.
Corps of Discovery
The name given to the expedition led by Lewis and Clark in 1804-1806 that explored the Louisiana Purchase and the Oregon lands extending to the West Coast.
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 223
Critical to the success of the corps were French trapper Toussaint Charbonneau and his Shoshone partner Sacagawea, who joined the expedition with their newborn child. Whether Sacagawea was the slave or the wife of Charbonneau is unclear, but she became an essential guide and an American legend. Sacagawea began as a cook and laundress for the corps while she carried her baby on her back but quickly used her knowledge of the countryside to find food and translate with some of the tribes they met. At the end of their journey, Lewis and Clark paid Charbonneau $500 for his services, but later they wondered whether they should have paid Sacagawea, too. According to unverified Shoshone tradition, Sacagawea lived to an old age, dying at the Wind River Indian Reservation in 1884.
As they tried to cross the Rocky Mountains in September of 1805, the corps moved beyond the rather inexact western boundary of the Louisiana Purchase into Oregon Country that was claimed by Britain, Russia, and Spain, but not the United States. As instructed by Jefferson, they kept going, and almost starved. They had assumed that the Rocky Mountains were like the Appalachians. They crossed through a valley expecting to see downward slopes, but instead, Clarke noted in his journal, they faced higher mountains “in every direction as far as I could see.” At Weippe Prairie in what is now Idaho, they stumbled into a party of Nez Perce Indians, by far the largest tribe in that part of the western Rockies, who brought them to a “large spacious lodge” and fed them. An Indian leader known as Twisted Hair drew a map of the river system leading to the Columbia River and the Pacific coast and taught the Americans how to make dugout canoes out of pine. The food saved the explorers lives, and the canoes saved the trip.
On November 24, 1805, the Corps of Discovery left their horses with Twisted Hair and, following the route he mapped for them, reached the Pacific Ocean. They built Fort Clatsop near present-day Astoria, Oregon, and wintered there until March 23, 1806, when they began the long, arduous journey home, reaching Saint Louis on September 23, 1806 (see Map 8-1). Word spread quickly to the nation and to Jefferson at the White House that the party, whom many had given up for lost, had made it back.
BRITISH POSSESSIONS ,
x S: dOM*Jmaine
SPANISH FLORIDA
Louisiana	X Forts
P^rctose,	t Mjssions
▲ Mountains
A [LEWS
O R E G O
Fortf Clatsop ~ ' )1806 s el couNT«4>4?i
MASSACHUSETTS?
NEW YORK V
CONNECTICUT
JERSEY DELAWARE "MARYLAND
X
San Francisco J
San Luis Obispo X Santa Barbara LosAngelesX SPANISH^ San Diego X
POSSE
MAP 8-1 Exploring The New Territory. This map shows the size of the Louisiana Purchase in comparison beyond^Lou^siTna3"'11	Un't6d Stat6S	r°Ute °f the Lewis and Clark exPedition through and
224 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
While Lewis and Clark were exploring the northern parts of the Louisiana Purchase and the Oregon coast, Jefferson launched other expeditions. Zebulon Pike led an expedition that departed from St. Louis in the fall of 1805 to explore the Mississippi and Arkansas Rivers and much of the present-day state of Colorado. In 1806, Jefferson appointed a third expedition led by Thomas Freeman, an astronomer and surveyor, to track the Red River Valley in the southern portion of the new territory. The reports from these expeditions opened the way for other adventurers and traders, some of whom, like New Yorks John Jacob Astor, made a fortune in the fur trade. The result for the Mandans, Nez Perce, and other tribes was far too often disease, war, and the loss of lands and a way of life.
Quick Review What key aspects of the Louisiana Purchase were of particular importance to the United States, and how would they change life for different groups of Americans?
American Voices
William Clark and Red Bear—IWo Views of the Lewis and Clark Experience
rhe rescue of the Lewis and Clark expedition by the Nez Perce in September 1805 was critical to the success of the expedition. But the explanation for why the Nez Perce were so friendly depends on
who was describing the event. For William Clark, it was an appropriate response to his gifts and skill as a negotiator. For the Nez Perce, it was a response to a much earlier Nez Perce tradition.
From the Journals of Lewis and Clark
September 20—I Set out early and...decended the mountain to a leavel pine Countrey proceeded on through a butifull Countrey for three miles to a Small Plain in which I found maney Indian lodges, at the distance of 1 mile from the lodges I met 3 boys, when they Saw me ran and hid themselves searched...found gave them Small pieces of ribin & Sent them forward to the village a man Came out to meet me with great Caution and Conducted me [us] to a large Spacious Lodge which he told me (by Signs) was the Lodge of his great Chief.. .great numbers of women gathered around me with much apparent Signs of fear, and apr. pleased they (those people) gave us a Small piece of Buffalow meat, Some dried Salmon beries & roots in different States, Some round and much like an onion which they call (Pas she co) quamash the Bread or Cake is called Pas-she-co Sweet, of this they make bread & Supe they also gave us the bread made of this root all of which we eate hartily, I gave them a fiew Small articles as preasents, and proceeded on with a Chief to his Village 2 miles in the Same Plain, where we were treated kindly in their way and continued with them all night. Those two Villages consist of about 30 double lodges, but fiew men a number of women & children; They call themselves Cho pun-nish or Pierced Noses; their dialect appears very different from the (flat heads) Tushapaws (I have seen).
Red Bear
[From an oral history recorded in 1926 with Red Bear's grandson]
Chief Red Bear first learned of white people through a girl of his band living on Tamonmo [the Salmon River]. When small she was stolen by the Blacklegs in the buffalo country, who sold her to some tribe farther toward the sunrise. In time she was bought by white people, probably in Canada, where she was well treated. It is a long story; how in time, carrying her little baby, she ran away and after several moons reached the friendly Selish, who cared for her and brought her in a dying condition to her own people at White Bird. Her baby had died on the way. She was called Watkuweis [Returned from a Faraway Country].
She told of the white people, how good they had been to her, and how well she liked them. When the first two white men, Lewis and Clark with their followers, came Watkuweis said to her people, "These are the people who helped me! Do them no hurt!"
This was why the strange people had been received in friendship. There had been a prophecy about Red Bear and a new people, which was thus fulfilled in 1805. He met the strangers. They first have a smoke. If no smoke, then they must fight. Red Bear made presents of dressed buckskins, and they gave him beads and a few other articles. They afterwards found the white man's gifts to be cheap.
Source: Frederick E Hoxie and Jay T. Nelson, editors, Lewis & Clark and the Indian Country: The Native American Perspective (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007), pp. 136-141.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Clark explain the friendly reception they received from the Nez Perce? What was Red Bear s explanation for the same reception?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light do these documents shed on the assumptions white Americans often brought to their interactions with American Indians and Indians brought to white Americans?
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 225
THE WAR OF
1812 8.4
Analyze the causes and impact of the War of 1812.
Jefferson expanded the United States, but he had been able to do little about the British and French navies that threatened the country as a result of conflicts between the two European powers. The actions Jefferson took to protect the United States on the seas actually hurt the country economically What had begun as an irritating concern to Jefferson escalated into the War of 1812 during the presidency of his successor James Madison.
That conflict, which continued from 1812 to 1815, deserves more attention than it often receives from historians. The war resolved issues that had limited U.S. development for decades, and its conclusion launched a new period of growth for the country. It was the last war ever fought between the United States and Great Britain. The two nations had been in conflict almost nonstop since 1775, but the end of this war brought real peace. It was also the last war in which Indian tribes were allied with one nation or against another. After the war, no tribe was ever again able to make an alliance with a foreign nation, and the U.S. government treated the tribes less and less as sovereign nations and more as an “internal matter.”
Renewed Tension Between the United States and Great Britain
The tensions that led the United States and Great Britain to go to war in 1812 had existed since the battles of Lexington and Concord in 1775. Despite treaties, the two nations were never fully at peace, and each made alliances with Indian tribes to make trouble for the other.
For the British, troubles in North America were a sideshow to a world war with France that had begun in 1689 and continued, with brief pauses, until 1815. English colonists fought on the British side until the French and Indian War ended in 1763. In 1778, France had come to the aid—decisive aid—of the American colonists in the Revolution. With the coming of the French Revolution in 1789 and the rise of Napoleon in 1799, the war between Britain and France took on a deeper ideological tone. While earlier wars had primarily been territorial disputes, after their Revolution, the French saw themselves as the agents of democracy against a despotic coalition led by Britain. Especially after the rise of Napoleon, the British saw themselves as defenders of the free world against Napoleonic tyranny. In the United States, the greatest divide between the emerging political parties was the Federalist tilt toward Britain and the Democratic-Republican tilt toward France. By early 1806, Napoleon’s armies controlled most of the European continent while the British Royal Navy controlled the oceans. For the United States, British control of the seas was a much larger threat than worries about who controlled the European continent.
With Britain and France each casting itself as the defender of freedom while fighting for national preservation, the war was intense. To survive, Britain depended on its navy to protect the island nation from invasion and to dominate the oceans. But the Royal Navy was always short of sailors, and one of the reasons for the shortage was the tendency of British sailors to desert and join the crew of a U.S. merchant vessel where the working conditions were better and the pay up to five times higher. The British regularly stopped U.S. merchant vessels and occasionally warships on the high seas, in violation of international law, to search for their own sailors and, all too often, also to force any able-bodied seaman, British or American, into service.
This policy of seizing sailors, or impressment, was seen as vital to Britain, but it was a direct threat to American freedom and to the economic survival of the United States. Impressments had long infuriated Americans and, in fact, had helped spark the Revolution in 1776 (see Chapter 5). Between 1803 and 1812, 3,000-6,000 American citizens were pressed into service on British warships against their will, many of whom never returned. The practice was an assault on individual liberties that challenged
226 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
everything the American Revolution stood for. A major crisis erupted in June 1807 when the Royal Navy s HMS Leopard opened fire on the USS Chesapeake after its commander refused to let British officers board the ship to look for deserters. Three American sailors were killed in the fighting, and the British then took four sailors off the Chesapeake who were either deserters from their navy or Americans resisting impressments. President Jefferson wrote, “This country has never been in such a state of excitement since the battle of Lexington.”
Jefferson and Congress, however, knew that the United States was too weak for a fight, in part, because of the cutbacks Jefferson had authorized in the navy and army that Adams had previously built up. Congress initially passed a Non-Importation Act, hoping that boycotting British goods would be an effective strategy, but it failed to have an effect. Consequently, Jefferson urged the Embargo Act, which Congress passed in December 1807, preventing U.S. trade with any foreign ports to keep ships and sailors “out of harm’s way.” The president was confident that the major impact would be on Britain, which he thought could not survive without American foodstuffs, and that the American people would be willing to suffer short-term loss to gain peace. He was wrong on both counts. British warehouses were full, the country was having a good harvest, other nations were willing to sell food, and they could wait out the Americans. Most Americans were anxious to maintain the income that commerce provided. New England shipping was devastated, and farmers in all of the states lost money as cotton, grain, and tobacco piled up and could not be shipped. Smugglers became active, by land, across the border between New England and Canada, and by sea, eluding the small U.S. Navy that tried to enforce the embargo. The Massachusetts and Connecticut legislatures, following the precedent of Jefferson’s own earlier Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, declared the embargo illegal in their states, thus setting up talk of secession or civil war.
As a compromise that was meant to appease New England merchants, Congress replaced the embargo with the Non-Intercourse Act in 1809, just days before Jefferson left office. The new act authorized trade with everyone except Britain and France. (France had plundered U.S. ships for supplies during their war with Britain.)
During Madison’s first term as president, tension continued to grow between the United States and Great Britain. In 1810, a further modification of the Non-Intercourse Act, known as Macon’s Bill No. 2, created new tensions, especially between the United States and Britain. British impressments of U.S. sailors continued unabated while each new act continued to hurt commercial ties between the two countries.
Embargo Act
An act passed by Congress in 1807 prohibiting American ships from leaving for any foreign port.
8.4
Non-Intercourse Act
An act, passed by Congress in 1809, designed to modify the Embargo Act by limiting it to trade with Britain and France so as to extend U.S. commerce in the rest of the world.
Renewed Tension Between Whites and Indians
While tensions mounted between the United States and Great Britain, warfare
between the United States and Indian tribes broke out in the Ohio country. After
the U.S. Army’s victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers and the subsequent Treaty
of Greeneville in 1795, the Old Northwest had been at peace. But a new generation
of Indians was much less willing to live with what they saw as an unfair treaty. A
new tribal alliance led by a charismatic religious figure named Tenskwatawa, or the
Prophet, and his half-brother, the military leader Tecumseh, frightened white settlers
and seriously challenged the small U.S. Army. Many correctly deduced that Tecumseh
and Tenskwatawa were aided by the British.
After their losses from the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, many Shawnees came to
believe that their sorry state was due to their having displeased Waashaa Monetoo, the
Good Spirit, who, their traditions said, had recreated the world after its destruction by
a flood. In the early 1800s, a spiritual leader, Tenskwatawa, told the tribes that their
dependence on white culture was the source of the Good Spirit’s unhappiness. After
200 years of coexistence, tribes like the Shawnees had become dependent on European
muskets, wore cotton clothing, cooked in European cookware, and even lived in
European-style houses. Tenskwatawa promised that, if his people would renounce
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 227
Two Shawnee leaders and half-brothers—Tecumseh, who led a diverse Indian military alliance, and Tenskwatawa, known as The Prophet—proposed a revival of Native American religion in opposition to white expansion.
European ways and goods, they could renew their culture and drive whites out of their country. He created a new settlement at what is now West Lafayette, Indiana, called Prophetstown, where Shawnees and other tribes gathered for spiritual renewal.
While Tenskwatawa preached, Tecumseh prepared for war. Tenskwatawa was a religiously inspired leader, Tecumseh an inspired military tactician. White colonists had killed their father Pukeshinwau at the beginning of the American Revolution. The brothers had seen whites make and break treaty after treaty. Tecumseh traveled throughout the Ohio territory and sought help from British authorities in Canada who, he remembered, had sought to exclude whites from the Ohio region before the American Revolution. Tecumseh traveled as far south as Tennessee and Alabama to recruit Cherokees, Choctaws, and Creeks. In a meeting with Choctaw and Chickasaw leaders in the spring of 1811, Tecumseh (speaking in the Shawnee language) said:
The whites are already a match for us all united, and too strong for any one tribe alone to resist; so that unless we support one another with our collective and united forces; unless every tribe unanimously combines to give check to the ambition and avarice of the whites, they will soon conquer us apart and disunited and we will be driven away from our native country and scattered as autumnal leaves before the wind.
Tecumseh was willing to negotiate with the United States, but his goal was an all-Indian alliance to drive all whites from the land south of Canada and from between the Alleghenies and the Mississippi.
Whites on the frontier were frightened. In September 1807, Thomas Kirker, the acting governor of the new state of Ohio, met with Tecumseh, and the two agreed to peace. But in November 1811, while Tecumseh was away seeking Cherokee allies, William Henry Harrison, governor of the Indiana Territory, attacked Prophetstown with 1,000 U.S. troops. Harrison’s troops burned the village to the ground, though
228 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
American Voices
Tecumseh, Speech to the Governor of Indiana, 1810
Ij i
Before William Henry Harrison, Governor of Indiana Territory, led the U.S. Army to attack the Shawnee encampment at Prophetstown, Tecumseh met with Harrison in hopes of establishing a peace agreement. For all of his distrust, Tecumseh was willing to negotiate, and the two met in August 1810. Tecumseh spoke little or no English, but the 1810 meeting included interpreters. The U.S. government interpreters were careful to transcribe the speech as accurately as possible, and the copies they sent to Washington became the most accurate account on record of Tecumseh's words.
Brother, I wish you to listen to me well. I wish to reply to you more explicitly as I think you do not clearly understand what I before said to you. I shall explain it again....
You ought to know that after we agreed to bury the Tomahawk at Greenville we then found their new fathers in the Americans who told us they would treat us well, not like the British who gave us but a small piece of pork every day. I want now to remind you of the promises of the white people. You recollect that the time the Delawares lived near the white people (Americans) and satisfied with the promises of friendship and remained in security, yet one of their towns was surprised and the men, women, and children murdered.
The same promises were given to the Shawnees, flags were given to them and were told by the Americans that they were
now children of the Americans. These flags will be as security for you; if the white people intend to do you harm hold up your flags and no harm will be done you. This was at length practiced and the consequence was that the person bearing the flag was murdered with others in their village. How my Brother after this conduct can you blame me for placing little confidence in the promises of our fathers the Americans?
Brother. Since the peace was made you have kill'd some of the Shawnee, Winnebagoes, Delawares, and Miamies and you have taken our lands from us, and I do not see how we can remain at peace with you if you continue to do so.
Source: In spite of the government's care, there are differing accounts of the speech. See for example Camilla Townsend, American Indian History: A Documentary Reader (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), pp. 96-99.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Tecumseh characterize past interactions between whites and Indians?
2.	Crafting an Argument
In your opinion, why was it so difficult for whites and Indians to live side by side in peace? What ideas does this document provide on this question?
8.4
the Prophet and most residents escaped. A year later, when the United States went to war with Great Britain, Tecumseh, strengthened by support from the British who had never stopped stirring up Indian opposition to the United States, led his tribal confederation in an all-out war on the Americans. With the United States and Britain formally at war, the Shawnee alliance with Britain was a major threat to the Americans.
War and Its Consequences
As hostilities grew between the United States and Great Britain and its Indian allies, some in Congress, known as the War Hawks, saw a war with Britain as just what the country needed. Republicans, led by Henry Clay of Kentucky and Felix Grundy of Tennessee, argued that war was key to territorial expansion. They were confident that if the United States went to war with Britain, those French inhabitants who remained in Canada after France ceded the territory to Britain would revolt, allowing the United States to seize Canada. The war hawks also wanted to attack the small Spanish colonies in Florida and claim that territory for the United States. With Britain and Spain out of the picture, the country could then settle things once and for all on the Indian frontier. Republican leader Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, eager to stop British disruptions to American trade in the Atlantic, told President Madison, “By war, we should be purified, as by fire.”
Federalists, however, saw war as just one more step in a process by which the Democratic-Republicans had moved the country into an unnecessary, and commercially foolish, hostility with Britain. When Madison asked Congress for a declaration
War Hawks
Members of Congress, mostly from the South and West, who aggressively pushed for a war against Britain after their election in 1810.
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 229
10*1
Land granted to Indians west of the Mississippi River Date and route of removal
MAP 10-1 Indian Removal. While Indian Removal began with the forced relocation of the Sac and Fox tribes from Illinois and Iowa, by far the largest relocation of tribes took place when the five Indian nations who were living in large territories in Georgia, Alabama, Florida, and Mississippi were forced far to the west to the newly created Indian Territory.
Catharine Beecher, a reformer associated with many causes, organized women across the Northwest to defend Indian rights and flooded Congress with petitions. Missionaries campaigned against the bill so vigorously that Georgia sentenced two of them to prison at hard labor for refusing to abandon the Indians.
In the Senate, Theodore Frelinghuysen of New Jersey, long a supporter of Protestant missionaries and reform efforts, led the opposition to the Indian Removal Bill. Frelinghuysen insisted that the government was bound by its treaties and that, if need be, should use the U.S. Army to force Georgia to retract its claims to the Indian lands. Henry Clay, who had not previously spoken in favor of Indian rights, joined the antiremoval forces. In the end, the removal bill passed the Senate 28 to 19, but passed the House by only a 102-98 vote. Among those voting no was Congressman Davy Crockett of Tennessee, who called the bill “oppression with a vengeance.” But Jackson signed the law May 28, 1830, making half a century of treaties void. The tribes would have to move. While all of the tribes resisted, negotiated, and ultimately had to surrender, the Cherokees went to U.S. courts to assert their claims to their lands. Initially,
276 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10.1
American Voices
Perspectives on Indian Removal, 1818-1829
10 J
mericans responded differently to President Andrew Jackson's plan to remove American Indians from the Old Southwest to reservations west of the Mississippi. Most whites in Georgia and many elsewhere applauded. In the north, many opposed Indian Removal, and Catharine Beecher organized a petition campaign in which women petitioned Congress to stop what
they saw as an immoral process. Not surprisingly, most Cherokees, t like the other tribes involved, also opposed removal. Writing a S decade before Jackson's speech, Cherokee women demanded that [ the tribal elders not cede land to the United States. The following I three documents represent three different American voices.
Andrew Jackson, Message to Congress, December8,1829	Statements of Residents of Steubenville Ohio, February 15,1830	Cherokee Women's Petition, June 30,1818
The condition and ulterior destiny of the Indian tribes within the limits of some of our States have become objects of much interest and importance. It has long been the policy of Government to introduce among them the arts of civilization, in the hope of gradually reclaiming them from a wandering life. This policy has, however, been coupled with another wholly incompatible with its success. Professing a desire to civilize and settle them, we have at the same time lost no opportunity to purchase their lands and thrust them farther into the wilderness. By this means they have not only been kept in a wandering state, but been led to look upon us as unjust and indifferent to their fate... Our ancestors found them the uncontrolled possessors of these vast regions. By persuasion and force they have been made to retire from river to river and from mountain to mountain, until some of the tribes have become extinct and others have left but remnants to preserve for awhile their once terrible names.... Humanity and national honor demand that every effort should be made to avert so great a calamity.... As a means of effecting this end 1 suggest for your consideration the propriety of setting apart an ample district west of the Mississippi, and without the limits of any State or Territory now formed, to be guaranteed to the Indian tribes as long as they shall occupy it, each tribe having a distinct control over the portion designated for its use. There they may be secured in the enjoyment of governments of their own choice, subject to no other control from the United States than such as may be necessary to preserve peace on the frontier and between the several tribes....	THAT your memorialists are deeply impressed with the belief that the present crisis in the affairs of the Indian nations, calls loudly on all who can feel for the woes of humanity.. ..It is readily acknowledged, that the wise and venerated founders of our country's free institutions, have committed the powers of government to those whom nature and reason declare the best fitted to exercise them; and your memorialists would sincerely deprecate any presumptuous interference on the part of their own sex, with the ordinary political affairs of the country, as wholly unbecoming the character of American Females.... yet all admit that there are times when duty and affection call on us to advise and persuade, as well as to cheer or to console. And if we approach the public representatives of our husbands and brothers, only in the humble character of suppliants in the cause of mercy and humanity, may we not hope that even the small voice of female sympathy will be heard?... In despite of the undoubted natural right, which the Indians have, to the land of their forefathers, and in the face of solemn treaties, pledging the faith of the nation for their secure possession of those lands, it is intended, we are told, to force them from their native soil, and to compel them to seek new homes in a distant and dreary wilderness. To you then, as the constitutional protectors of the Indians within our territory and as the peculiar guardians of our national character, and our country's welfare, we solemnly and earnestly appeal to save this remnant of a much injured people from annihilation, to shield our country from the curses denounced on the cruel and ungrateful, and to shelter the American character from lasting dishonor.	We have called a meeting among ourselves to consult on the different points now before the council, relating to our national affairs. We have heard with painful feelings that the bounds of the land we now possess are to be drawn into very narrow limits. The land was given to us by the Great Spirit above as our common right, to raise our children upon, & to make support for our rising generations. We therefore humbly petition our beloved children, the head men & warriors, to hold out to the last in support of our common right, as the Cherokee nation have been the first settlers of this land; we therefore claim the right to the soil. We well remember that our country was formerly very extensive, but by repeated sales it has become circumscribed to the very narrow limits we have at present. Our Father the President advised us to become farmers, to manufacture our own clothes, & to have our children instructed. To this advice we have attended in everything as far as we were able. Now the thought of being compelled to remove [to] the other side of the Mississippi is dreadful to us, because it appears to us that we, by this removal, shall be brought to a savage state again, for we have, by the endeavor of our Father the President, become too much enlightened to throw aside the privileges of a civilized life. We therefore unanimously join in our meeting to hold our country in common as hitherto. Some of our children have become Christians. We have missionary schools among us. We have h[e]ard the gospel in our nation. We have become civilized & enlightened, & are in hopes that in a few years our nation will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences & arts, which are both useful & necessary in civilized society....
Sources: Andrew Jackson, Annual Message to Congress, December 8,1829, Messages and Papers of the Presidents, ed. J. D. Richardson, National Archives and Records Administration, (1896), II, 456-459 (Dec. 8,1829); Ladies of Steubenville, Ohio, Petition Against Indian removal (February 15,1830), Ellen Skinner, Women and the National Experience: Sources in Women's History, third edition (Boston: Prentice-Hall, 1996), pp.42-143; "Petition of Nancy Ward and Other Cherokee Women to the United States Congress, 19\818," in Karen L. Kilcup, editor, Native American Women's Writings, 1800-1924: An Anthology (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 29-30.
(continued)
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 277
y

r b
10.1
10 J
103
(continued)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Jackson attempt to argue that Indian Removal was in the Indians' best interest? How might opponents of Indian Removal have responded to his position?
2.	Contextualization
How might the fact that two petitions in opposition to Indian Removal were written by women have affected their
reception? How might it have helped the authors'cause? How might it have hurt?
3. Contextualization
The Cherokee women say that they hope that, soon, their people "will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences & arts, which are both useful & necessary in civilized society." What does this statement mean? What do you think is the strongest reason they give for asking not to be moved west?
they won. In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831) and Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the U.S. Supreme Court, under Chief Justice John Marshall, ruled that the Cherokees were a “domestic dependent nation” and could not be forced by the state of Georgia to give up land that treaty rights agreed to by the United States government had given them. Jackson simply ignored the court. Jackson is supposed to have said, “John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce it.” No one actually heard Jackson say that, but Jackson controlled the army and he was not about to enforce the court’s decision. No other president before or after ignored the Supreme Court in that way.
The Indian Removal Act and the implementation that followed was a disaster for the Five Civilized Tribes. The government had seized their homes and offered in return land that was thousands of miles away and completely foreign to them. Moreover the tribes were divided about how to respond. While most of the country was focused on the Cherokees, Jackson sent Secretary of War John Eaton to negotiate with the Choctaws. By excluding those he considered troublemakers and bribing others, Eaton got a small group of Choctaw leaders to agree for the tribe to leave its homes in Mississippi, but most in the tribe considered those who negotiated the removal treaty to be nonrepresentative and refused to abide by it. The federal troops enforced it anyway.
The French observer Alexis de Tocqueville, who became famous for his analysis of American life in the Jacksonian era, described the day the Choctaws crossed the Mississippi River on their way west:
At the end of 1831,1 stood on the left bank of the Mississippi... .It was then the depths of winter and the cold was exceptionally severe.. .the snow had frozen hard on the ground; the river was drifting with huge ice-floes. The Indians had brought their families with them and hauled along the wounded, the sick, newborn babies, and old men on the verge of death. They had neither tents nor wagons....I saw them embark to cross the wide river and that solemn spectacle will never be erased from my memory. Not a sob or complaint could be heard... they stood silent. Their afflictions were of long standing and they considered them beyond remedy. Already the Indians had all embarked upon the boat which was to carry them; their dogs still remained upon the bank. When these animals finally saw they were being left behind forever, they raised all together a terrible howl and plunged into the icy Mississippi to swim after their masters.
Within the decade most members of the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Creek tribes had made the same crossing. Only the Seminoles avoided their fate.
Alabama and Mississippi followed Georgia’s lead and voted to end tribal rights for the Creeks. In March 1832, the Creeks surrendered all land east of the Mississippi, and most of them moved to Oklahoma. Those that took advantage of a promise that they could stay in the East as private citizens soon lost their lands. Some of the remain-ing Creeks began violent resistance to state and federal authorities, but the so-called Second Creek War of 1836-37 ended quickly when Jackson’s secretary of war ordered federal troops to expel all Creeks from lands east of the Mississippi. The Creeks who
'8 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10,1
were deported after the Second Creek War suffered higher mortality rates than the Cherokees; perhaps half lived to see Oklahoma.
Among the Cherokees, a civil conflict broke out about how to respond to the demand that they move to Oklahoma. Principal Chief John Ross and most of the Cherokees were determined to fight for their lands. A minority, some of whom were among the rising middle class and slave holders within the tribe, decided that a compromise was better than forced expulsion. John Ridge and Elias Boudinot, publisher of the Cherokee Phoenix, signed the Treaty of New Echota in December 1835, trading land in Georgia for new land in Oklahoma and $5 million. The U.S. Senate barely ratified the treaty after Daniel Webster and Henry Clay pointed out how fraudulent it was since the majority of the Cherokees opposed it.
After Ridge and Boudinot and their followers departed for Oklahoma, or Indian Territory as it was called, the U.S. Army put most of the remaining members of the tribe in detention camps. A few were able to flee into the wilderness and remained in their homelands but without their land. Others fought, but in the end, Chief Ross and General Winfield Scott negotiated a settlement to avoid further bloodshed. Even though Jackson had left office by then, his successor, Martin Van Buren was determined to enforce his predecessor’s policy. From the detention camps, soldiers forced 12,000 Cherokee men, women, and children to march west in the fall and winter of 1838-39. It was an especially cold winter and a terrible time to make a march of over a thousand miles into the unknown. The Cherokees never had enough food, blankets, or warm clothing, and as they moved in large groups, disease and exposure took a terrible toll. On what became known as the Trail of Tears, perhaps a quarter to a third of the marchers, including Ross’s wife, died before they reached Oklahoma.
Seeing what was happening to other tribes, the Chickasaws moved west quickly on their own. The Seminoles of Florida Territory had no intention of moving, however. Although a minority of Seminoles agreed to move, most stayed in Florida, disappearing into the swamps and hiding places they knew well. When soldiers tried to force them to move, the Seminoles annihilated them. The Second Seminole War was not resolved until 1842. Fewer Seminoles than members of any other tribe ever moved to Oklahoma.
102
103
Trail of Tears
The forced march in 1838 of the Cherokee Indians from their homelands in Georgia to the Indian Territory in the West; thousands of Cherokees died along the way.
Cherokee men, women, and children, and their U.S. Army guards, rode or walked on the long march from their ancestral homes across a thousand miles to new territory in Oklahoma.
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 279
10.1
10 J
10 J
In the meantime, the Sac and Fox tribes, which had already been exiled to the Indian Territory as a result of earlier removals from the Old Northwest, were not too happy about life there. In April 1832, a chief named Black Hawk led 1,000-2,000 Sac and Fox people back east across the Mississippi, closer to their old homelands. The Sac and Fox Indians were moving mostly to escape from hostile Sioux groups on the Great Plains and Iowa Territory. The Illinois governor took the tribes move into Illinois as an attack, called out the militia, and asked for federal troops. In Black Hawk s War, federal and state troops on the east side of the Mississippi and Sioux warriors on the west virtually annihilated the Fox and Sac tribes, to the delight of whites who were happy to see these tribes completely out of their way.
In fact, Jackson had meant to use the removal law for Georgia to force all Indians east of the Mississippi out of their lands. When the forced exile finally reached its goal by the end of the 1830s, only the Iroquois in New York, a few Cherokees in North Carolina, and scattered small communities remained legally east of the Mississippi, although others like the Seminoles simply melted into the woods and could not be found by the government. All in all, 46,000 Indians were forcibly removed during the Jackson administration, and subsequent administrations removed as many more.
The Cherokees and other tribes tend to disappear from the history books after the Trail of Tears. But the Cherokees, Choctaws, and Creeks were resilient people. Forced onto an inhospitable and alien land, they sought to reestablish their communities and culture. To a surprising degree, they succeeded. As the last Cherokees arrived in Indian Territory in 1839, the tribe adopted a new Constitution and established Tahlequah as their capital. In 1844, they began publishing the Cherokee Advocate in both English and Cherokee. They also set up a school system with elementary schools as well as higher education institutes and seminaries to prepare teachers—European and Cherokee—for their schools. In the U.S. Civil War, parts of the tribe favored each side, and the divided tribe fought internally. But again they rebuilt after the war. Today, there are some 200,000 to 300,000 Cherokees, of whom 70,000 live within the Cherokee Nation in northeast Oklahoma and the rest are scattered around the country, making them the largest federally recognized tribe today.
Jacksonian Economics—The War on the Bank of the United States
The Second Bank of the United States
A national bank chartered by Congress in 1816 with extensive regulatory powers over currency and credit.
In his campaign for president, Jackson pledged to do something about the Bank of the United States, which he and many others blamed for the Panic of 1819 and saw as an elitist threat to a democracy. The Second Bank of the United States was patterned on the first Bank of the United States that had been a cornerstone of Alexander Hamilton’s economic plans for the new nation (see Chapter 7). The first bank had been chartered in 1791 for a period of 20 years. In 1811, the Jeffersonian Republicans refused to extend its charter and it closed. Henceforth, it seemed, state banks would issue currency in the form of banknotes backed by gold or silver, federal funds would be deposited in state banks, and the federal government, like everyone else, would borrow money from these banks when needed. Then came the War of 1812.
As the War of 1812 threatened to bankrupt the country, some of the nation’s richest men, led by John Jacob Astor, met with Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin and offered to loan the nation the funds it needed if the Bank of the United States were rechartered. They believed that only a national bank could build long-term prosperity and ensure that their loan would be repaid. As a result, a charter for a Second Bank of the United States passed Congress in 1816. The Madison, Monroe, and John Quincy Adams administrations were strong advocates for a unified national market economy that could foster prosperity and stability, and they had used the bank to support that economy. Jackson wanted prosperity, but he disagreed about the government’s role in the nation’s economy.
The Second Bank of the United States was never without enemies. The Constitution never mentioned a bank, and strict constructionists—who thought the government
2i
Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10.1
should limit its role to things specifically included in the Constitution—always opposed it. The bank was also seen by many as a way to expand the power of the commercial elite based in New York and Philadelphia and, thus, was seen as an enemy by farmers whether they lived on small out-of-the-way farms in the still very rural country or on the bourgeoning plantations of the cotton-growing South. In the opinion of many farmers, whether small or large scale, Jackson was the defender of their interests against threatening commercial elites. Particularly since the Supreme Court’s ruling on McCulloch v. Maryland that Congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest, popular support for the Bank had weakened (see Chapter 9). Many farmers did not believe “the national interest” that Congress saw was in their interests.
During his first months in office, Jackson did not say a lot about the bank, but in December 1829, he told Congress: “Both the constitutionality and the expediency of the law creating this bank are well questioned.... [I] t has failed in the great end of establishing a uniform and sound currency.” In spite of Jackson’s challenge, the bank’s charter ensured that it could continue for 7 more years, but Jackson had fired a warning shot. Before long, he would do much more.
Many of Jackson’s strongest supporters disagreed with him about the bank. The country was prospering, credit was solid, and the soundness of the currency, despite Jackson’s words, seemed secure. The federal bank’s policies of calling in loans may have helped start the Panic of 1819, but Nicholas Biddle, the bank’s president, had done as much as anyone in the country to end the hard times after the Panic of 1819. Nevertheless Jackson was a populist, intending to represent the common people politically. And although the nation’s elite supported the bank, many citizens did not like any banks. In a meeting at the White House he told Biddle, “I do not dislike your bank any more than all banks,” but the federal bank was the only one Jackson could do something about. His attack on the bank was as emotional as it was calculated.
For the next few years, Biddle led the bank in continued efforts to stabilize the currency, help state banks through difficult times, and expand the nation’s credit, something that both northern mill owners and western land promoters liked. The bank also concentrated wealth and power within the economy in the hands of a commercial elite and strengthened the nation’s unified market economy based on currency and trade. That uneven concentration of wealth and power was something Jackson would not forgive.
In 1832, Jackson launched his campaign for reelection. For the first time, something resembling modern political parties played a role. Under Jackson’s leadership, the Democratic-Republicans had become simply the Democrats. They easily nominated Jackson for a second term and his handpicked running mate, Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, for vice president. The opposition to Jackson, sometimes known as the National Republicans because they had supported a strong national government, now became known simply as the Whig Party. They nominated Henry Clay for president and John Sergeant of Pennsylvania as vice president. Unlike the Jacksonian Democrats, the Whig Party was committed to Alexander Hamilton’s vision of a federal government that took an active role in shaping the economy, so they strongly supported the Second Bank of the United States. The Whig nominee, Henry Clay, urged Biddle to secure the bank’s future as well as that of the pro-bank Whig Party. If Biddle were to request an extension of the bank’s charter, even though the original charter would not expire for 4 years, Clay would promise to make the bank an issue in the campaign. Either Biddle would win the recharter fight immediately, or he would provide Clay a weapon with which to attack Jackson. Biddle, who was astute at counting votes in Congress, took Clay’s advice and applied for a new charter. The charter bill passed both houses of Congress easily. But Jackson vetoed it. He told Martin Van Buren, who was now his running mate, “The bank, Mr. Van Buren, is trying to kill me, but I will kill it.”
102
103
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 281
By the time Jackson became president, political cartoons were becoming popular, including this one that shows Jackson using his order to withdraw government funds to topple the pillars of the bank as Nicholas Biddle, the bank's "devil president, and investors run.
In November 1832, Jackson defeated Clay 219 electoral votes to 49. Congress refused to override the presidents veto.
Biddle still tried to rally support in Congress. He made arguments, offered congressmen loans, and ensured that the banks lead attorney was elected to Congress from Philadelphia. When Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster complained that his annual retainer from the bank had not been “refreshed as usual,” Biddle promised quick action. Biddle also loosened credit across the country, ensuring short-term prosperity but provoking an eventual reckoning. He was desperate to save his bank.
Jackson then made his move. He ordered his treasury secretary to remove federal deposits from the bank and place them in 23 state banks that he selected—banks that were quickly called Jacksons “pet” banks by his opponents. The move was meant to destroy the Second Bank of the United States. But the law said that federal funds could be withdrawn only if there was clear evidence that the deposits were not secure. Even Jacksons handpicked auditors could find no such evidence. When Treasury Secretary McLane refused the presidents order to move the funds, Jackson promoted him to secretary of state. When another treasury secretary also refused, Jackson fired him.
Finally, Jackson’s third treasury secretary, Roger B. Taney, who also had doubts about the legality of removing federal funds, hit on a compromise. He would not actually remove federal deposits from the bank, but he would do something just as effective to undermine the bank. Going forward, Taney regularly paid the government’s bills with funds from the accounts that the government had in the Bank of the United States, but he stopped depositing new federal revenue in the bank. Instead, the government’s income went to the state banks. It was a mortal blow. The federal government’s accounts slowly shrunk to zero and the Second Bank of the United States was dead, though it took a few years to die.
Led by Clay, the Senate censured the president, saying he had “assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the Constitution and laws.” But the censure did not hurt Jackson or save the bank. Biddle’s politically motivated loans and payments sapped support for the bank. The Second Bank of the United States became a wholly private bank and soon went bankrupt. The combination of inflation caused by Biddle’s too-easy credit and the loss of a national bank that could stabilize the currency caused financial distress. By 1837—just after Jackson left office—the nation experienced another financial panic, and there was no national entity to help stabilize the economy. Nevertheless, efforts to revive the bank failed. For decades, all of the paper currency in circulation would be issued by state banks, some of less than solid credit. Only in 1863, during the Civil War, did the U.S. government again issue paper money, and not until the creation of the Federal Reserve Bank in 1913 did the nation again have a central bank to regulate the economy.
The Tariff, the Union, and the Nullification Crisis
The battle over the tariff began as a modest disagreement over federal tax policy. Before it ended, that battle was the greatest constitutional crisis the nation faced between the adoption of the Constitution in 1789 and the Civil War in 1861. To a degree, it was a personal battle between two proud and stubborn men, Andrew Jackson and John C. Calhoun. In another sense it was a battle about the fundamental nature of the U.S. government.
ANDREW JACKSON VS. JOHN C. CALHOUN
John C. Calhoun of South Carolina had been elected vice president when John Quincy Adams won the presidency in 1824, irt IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10.1
and he was reelected to that office in 1828 to serve with Jackson. Because separate ballots were cast for presidential and vice presidential candidates after the passage of the Twelfth Amendment in 1804 and before the rise of party nominating conventions in 1832, no one thought it strange that two leaders as hostile to each other as Adams and Jackson would have the same vice president. As a congressman and as secretary of war under President James Monroe, Calhoun had been a nationalist who favored internal improvements as much as Henry Clay or John Quincy Adams. He sought a strong national government and had supported the Bank of the United States. Although his views differed from Jacksons on some issues, everyone expected Calhoun and Jackson, as proslavery southerners, to have a close partnership. It was not to be.
One of the first wedges between them was purely social. Jacksons Secretary of War John Eaton had married the recently widowed Margaret O’Neale Timberlake, but rumors swirled that she was a widow only because her first husband, a naval officer, had committed suicide when he learned of her long adulterous relationship with Eaton. Jackson, who had been deeply hurt by attacks on his own marriage, defended the Eatons. Others in Washington, led by Mrs. Calhoun, snubbed Peggy Eaton. When Emily Donelson, Jacksons official White House hostess, joined with Mrs. Calhoun, Jackson temporarily banished her from the White House. He never forgave the Calhouns.
Another reason for the growing split between Jackson and Calhoun centered on the fact that Calhoun’s political beliefs were changing. By 1828, Calhoun, who had previously advocated for a strong federal role in the life of the nation—far stronger than anything Jackson ever advocated—was becoming the nation’s strongest defender of states’ rights against federal authority. This new stance may have reflected an honest change of heart, but it also served a political purpose. Regardless, it guaranteed a clash with Jackson since no matter how much Jackson might have favored states’ rights in the past, he would not tolerate any challenge to his authority as president.
Many of the leaders in South Carolina, Calhoun’s home state, were becoming very fearful of the federal government, and South Carolina was developing the strongest anti-federal stance in the Union. The South Carolina Radicals, as they were called, dominated state government. They advocated the right of states to declare any federal law null and void or even to secede from the Union. The reason was clear: South Carolinians feared for the future of slavery more than people in any other state. Most residents of South Carolina—54 percent—were enslaved people of African descent. In some rice-growing regions of the state, that figure was closer to 90 percent. A wealthy but deeply fearful white elite governed these slaves and depended on their labor to generate continuing wealth. In 1827, a pamphlet called The Crisis; or, Essays on the Usurpations of the Federal Government argued that federal tariffs, internal improvements, and other federal activities were all means to enable the national government, if it chose, to abolish slavery. As word spread that Parliament was about to abolish slavery throughout the British Empire in the 1830s, the fear grew that Congress might try to do the same. Calhoun had to decide whether he was with his state’s planter elite or against them. He might have dreamed about becoming president someday, but in the meantime, he would have to win elections in South Carolina. He made his choice.
NULLIFICATION AND THE FUTURE OF THE REPUBLIC
In 1828, Calhoun wrote a pamphlet arguing that a state could declare a tariff or any other federal law null and void. Calhoun claimed that since state-by-state conventions had ratified the Constitution, state conventions, not the Supreme Court, had the authority to decide what was constitutional. In his view, once a state convention declared a federal law void, other states would have to weigh in, and only a new amendment to the Constitution could force the law on the dissenting state. Calhoun did not advocate secession as many of the South Carolina Radicals did. Instead, he hoped nullification in response to a tariff or to restrictions on slavery would make secession unnecessary. He was thus more moderate than many South Carolinians, but that moderation would not continue to be the case. J 10.2
I
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 283
L
10.1
io j j
10.? 5
Tariff of Abominations
A revised federal tariff (or tax on imports) that lowered the tax on cotton products but raised it on many of the products made in the mid-Atlantic states.
The tariff, not the issue of slavery, brought the issue of nullification to the fore. The tariff, or tax on imported goods, had been the major source of financial support since the Washington administration, and it had been an issue in the 1828 election in which Jackson defeated Adams. As Jacksons supporters prepared for that election, Jackson’s chief advisor Martin Van Buren realized that, even though he and Jackson opposed a high tariff—in part, because they thought the federal government needed less money and, in part, because the tax raised the cost of foreign-made consumer products in the United States—the Adams-Clay tariff was popular in many parts of the country because it protected local industries from foreign competition and because many people liked the internal improvements like roads and canals that the tariff helped finance. Adams and Clay might want to fight the 1828 election on the issue of tariffs, but Van Buren did not. When the Adams administration suggested a new tariff, Van Buren and his congressional allies decided to reshape it rather than oppose it. They knew they could not win New England in the next election, so they did not hesitate to modify the proposed tariff by reducing the protection for the cotton produced by New England mill owners, thus allowing foreign-made cotton to be sold more cheaply than might otherwise have been the case. They also raised tariffs to protect export of products like molasses, hemp, iron, and wool, which were produced in the mid-Atlantic states, especially in Pennsylvania, to woo voters there by protecting their industries and jobs from foreign competition. The result was a tariff that raised the price of products that many Americans bought from foreign sources and that angered the cotton mill owners who originally wanted the tariff but now saw the protection of their industry disappear. The new tariff also infuriated rural interests, especially southern plantation owners, who saw the cost of everything they needed go up while no protection was provided to the price of the goods they produced and sold on the international market. The 1828 tariff came to be known as the Tariff of Abominations because it was so uneven and obviously unfair in the industries and regions it protected, but it passed Congress and set the stage for a confusing presidential campaign and the crisis that followed.
Planters in South Carolina saw the tariff as a terrible hardship and an unfair use of federal power. To a degree, they were right. A tax on imports raised the cost of virtually everything the planters needed. Planters claimed that 40 out of every 100 bales of cotton they produced went to pay the tariff. This claim was an exaggeration, but the tariff may have raised the cost of living in South Carolina by 20 percent. In addition, planters worried that a tariff on imported goods might cause other nations to purchase less cotton either in retaliation or because, with Americans buying less from abroad, other nations might not have had the funds to purchase American grown cotton. With their state’s economy hurting, public opinion in South Carolina supported nullification of the tariff.
The issue of states’ rights versus the rights of the federal government was argued on the floor of the U.S. Senate in January 1830. It was a debate that would be remembered for generations. South Carolina Senator Robert Y. Hayne, a protege of Calhoun’s, claimed that the federal government was making the North the winner and the South the loser and that the pro-Northern policy has invaded the State of South Carolina, is making war upon her citizens, and endeavoring to overthrow her principles and institutions.” Everyone understood that Hayne was talking about the tariff but also the issue of slavery. He was determined to defend the right of South Carolina to nullify federal law and, if still dissatisfied, to secede from the Union if Congress ever made a move against slavery. Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster’s “Second Reply to Hayne” staked out a different position. Webster pleaded for a strong federal union that no state should be allowed to undermine. His closing line, “Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable” became part of American lore. Hayne congratulated Webster on winning the war of words, though Hayne never changed his mind.
14 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
In January 1830 as tensions were building over the right claimed by South Carolina to nullify federal law, Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster-shown here—defended the priority of the federal government and the cause of the national union.
At first, people wondered how the president would respond to the debate. Jackson had campaigned for reducing the federal role in people’s lives, but he did not like to be crossed. He was not elected to see the government over which he presided pushed aside. As a military man, he would not countenance mutiny. As a politician, he despised Calhoun s self-serving strategic maneuvering. To the surprise of some, Jackson, the president elected with virtually no support from New England, embraced Webster’s speech in spite of the fact that it was given by the senator from Massachusetts.
Four months after the Hayne-Webster debate, political leaders were asked to make toasts at a banquet. Looking directly at his vice president, Jackson, offered a simple toast, “Our Union: It must be preserved.” Calhoun responded, “The Union. Next to our liberty, the most dear. May we always remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states....” It marked the final break between the two men.
Nevertheless, as strongly as Jackson believed in asserting federal authority, he was still prepared to compromise about the tariff itself.
The actual rate charged in the tariff mattered far less to Jackson than the principle that no state had a right to nullify federal law. A compromise seemed possible when Congress convened in 1831. Former President John Quincy Adams had been elected to the House of Representatives from Massachusetts (the only former president in history to return to Congress), and the congressional leaders asked him to write a new tariff to replace the Tariff of Abominations.
Adams took the job seriously. He reduced the duty on goods not
produced in the United States and therefore not in need of protection, but retained tariffs to protect growing U.S. industries, especially iron and cotton textiles. He also reduced the tariff on cheap woolens—which slaves wore—from 45 percent to 5 percent, a significant concession to the slave states.
Most of the South found Adams’s tariff reasonable. Besides, much of the cottongrowing South was prospering, despite the tariff, because of other Jacksonian policies, especially from the new land that Indian Removal had made available for growing cotton. Other states were in no mood to press the nullification issue.
But South Carolina was different. Much of the state’s farmland had been exhausted by decades of overuse, and its dependency on slave labor made its leaders more fearful of federal intervention in the institution of slavery than those of any other state. Led by Calhoun, the state’s leaders believed that they had to win the right to nullify the tariff to establish the larger principal that states could nullify any law. For them, the Adams tariff was not enough. In November 1832, a South Carolina state convention declared that both the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional and that “it shall not be lawful.. .to enforce payment of duties imposed by the said acts within the limits of this state” after February 1833. They also said that the state would secede if the federal government tried to force it to back down. The South Carolina legislature elected Robert Hayne, who had debated with Webster, as the governor to lead the state through these difficult times and elected Calhoun to replace Hayne in the Senate. Calhoun would essentially be South Carolina’s ambassador to the federal government for the next 2 decades. Calhoun resigned as vice president in December 1832, a little more than 2 months before his term ended, and returned to the Senate as a member, a very belligerent member. The stage was set for a major confrontation.
In November 1832, the South Carolina legislature also raised a state militia of25,000 volunteers. Jackson responded with a proclamation, stating that the state’s vote was “in direct violation of their duty as citizens of the United States.” According to Jackson, they had no right to nullify federal law and certainly not to raise their own army and,
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 285
he said, “Disunion by armed force is treason.” He told a South Carolina congressman, “I will hang the first man of them I can get my hands on to the first tree I can find.” He backed his words with action, reinforcing federal garrisons and sending armed revenue ships to Charleston Harbor. He also shifted the collection of customs duties in Charleston to warships offshore. When Governor Hayne told Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri that he did not think Jackson would really hang anyone, Benton, who knew Jackson better, replied, “I tell you, Hayne, when Jackson begins to talk about hanging, they can begin to look out for ropes!” Jackson also lobbied to ensure no other southern state supported South Carolina and pushed Congress to keep the tariffs low.
In the end, no shots were fired. On March 1, 1833, Congress passed a compromise tariff that Henry Clay had crafted based on Adams’s proposals and gave the president the authority to put down the rebellion. Wiser heads in South Carolina decided to compromise. The state convention reconvened and declared victory based on the new Clay tariff. For spite they also nullified the congressional vote of new military authority, which they called the “Force Bill,” but that action was now meaningless since South Carolina was no longer resisting federal authority.
Jackson won the nullification battle, but it was an incomplete victory. He made it clear, in words and actions, which Abraham Lincoln would use as precedent, that no state could nullify federal law and that the U.S. government would use force to assert its authority. He was treated as a hero in many parts of the country and even
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Nullification Crisis
The 1832 South Carolina convention that passed the Ordinance of Nullification said:
Whereas the Congress of the United States, by various acts, purporting to be acts laying duties and imposts [taxes] on foreign imports, but in reality intended for the protection of domestic manufacturers, and giving the bounties to classes and individuals engaged in particular employments, at the expense and to the injury and oppression of other classes and individuals...hath exceeded it just powers under the Constitution...
We, therefore, the people of the State of South Carolina in Convention assembled, do declare and ordain...That the several acts and parts of acts of the Congress of the United States, purporting to be laws for the imposing of duties and imposts on the importation of foreign commodities...are unauthorized by the Constitution of the United States, and violate the true meaning and intent thereof, and are null, void, and no law, nor binding upon this state, its officers or citizens.
This declaration was not the first time in U.S. history that a state had taken such a stand. The Kentucky and Virginia resolves
of 1798 and 1799, written by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, had said the same thing about the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Hartford Convention that met in 1814 said the much the same thing about Congress having declared war on Great Britain in 1812. Yet unlike the response to earlier challenges, President Jackson declared the South Carolina ordinance "incompatible with the existence of the Union" and prepared for a military response.
Source: Statues at Large of South Carolina, Vol. I, pp. 329ff. (Columbia, South Carolina: A. S. Johnston, 1836).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
Why did the authors of the Ordinance of Nullification believe that the Tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional?
2.	Craft an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: "As the Nullification Crisis demonstrates, the ratification of the Constitution in 1788 was only a first, tentative step towards defining the relationship between the federal government and the states.” What events and developments between 1788 and 1832 support your position?
I6
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848 given an honorary degree by Harvard University. Even so, neither Calhoun nor the South Carolina legislature admitted defeat. In fact, that legislature passed a new law in 1834 requiring anyone holding state office to swear primary loyalty to South Carolina and only conditional loyalty to the federal government. This law effectively barred Unionists, those moderates who disagreed with nullification, perhaps a third of the state’s voters, from state office for the next 30 years.
Alexis de Tocqueville was in the United States during the Nullification Crisis. He took a dim view of the compromise on the tariff and the decision of South Carolina to nullify the “Force Bill”:
Either I am mistaken or the federal government of the Unites States is daily losing its power; it is gradually withdrawing from public affairs and is increasingly narrowing its sphere of action... .1 think I have seen a more lively feeling of independence and a more evident affection for regional government developing in the individual states of the Union.
The outcome of this movement, Tocqueville said, was “hidden in the future and I do not claim the ability to lift the veil.” But he remained worried for the future of the country.
10J
10.2
10 J
10.1
Quick Review Was Andrew Jackson's presidency democratic? Which of his actions and policies support your argument?
DEMOCRATIZED RELIGION: THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENING
Analyze the diversity of American religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
10.2
Most Americans had strong opinions about Andrew Jackson. They might love or hate him, but they followed his career. However, politics was far from the only interest of most people. Many things closer to home, and sometimes closer to their own souls, mattered more. For many Americans in the 1820s and 1830s, the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens was far more important than Presidents Jacksons policies or opinions.
No popular movement was more powerful than the upsurge in religious activity that took place in Jacksonian America. Once again de Tocqueville understood the country well: “There is no country in the whole world in which the Christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in America.” He described the Christianity he saw as “a democratic and republican religion.” When de Tocqueville wrote these words in the early 1830s, the Second Great Awakening was in full swing. It had begun around 1800 (see Chapter 8), but gathered new strength in Jacksonian America. Contrary to what Tocqueville implied, not all Americans were Protestant Christians, and many of those who were Christians did not fit into traditional Protestantism. But for a large numbekof those who lived from the 1820s to the 1840s, religion was important, even if formal membership in a specific religious congregation was not.
Charles G. Finney and New York's "Burner-Over District"
In 1821, Charles Grandison Finney, a 29-year-old lawyer in Adams, New York, not far from the Erie Canal, was struggling with the question of whether true religious belief was consistent with his legal career. He decided to leave his law practice, and began to preach in churches in upstate New York, eventually becoming one of thejnost influential preachers in the United States.
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 287
103 ;
In July 1824, Finney was ordained a Presbyterian minister in spite of his lack of formal training. In 1826, the spirit of revivalism hit upstate New York, and in 1830, Finney led the largest religious revival ever seen in Rochester, New York. Six hundred people joined one of the town’s three Presbyterian Churches, and the other denominations were also strengthened.
Finney did not seek an emotional catharsis from his congregants but, like an attorney, argued his case logically using wit and wisdom. Nevertheless, in his preaching, the rigid religious orthodoxy that dominated Congregational and Presbyterian churches gave way to a more egalitarian spirit. Finney called people to change their lives, not necessarily to agreement with specific creeds. Because of his preaching, hundreds, then thousands took religion more seriously, joined churches, participated in reform movements, and changed New York and American society.
By the late 1830s, the area along the Erie Canal where Finney preached had become known as “the burned-over district” because of the fires of religious enthusiasm that rolled over the region. Finney was far from the only revivalist in New York. However, he gave the New York revivals a distinct tone—different not only from the emotionalism of frontier revivals but also from the staid life of many established churches. Ihe Erie Canal also made communications easier and faster than before, so word of the revivals traveled fast.
Lyman Beecher and the Growth of Voluntary Societies
As a young minister, Lyman Beecher had been one of the staunchest defenders of state support for the Congregational churches in Connecticut (see Chapter 8). Once the Connecticut churches lost their government support, Beecher embraced the new situation and supported revivals and voluntary associations for moral reform in New England and the nation. Beecher described his goal:
A
Bible for every family, a school for every district, and a pastor for every 1000 souls, must be the motto upon the standard, round which the millions who enjoy these blessings must rally for the purpose of extending them to those who do not. Lyman Beecher, one of the leaders of the Second Great Awakening, is shown here with his numerous children including petitioner and educator Catharine (to the left of her father), Harriet Beecher Stowe (far right), and one of the most famous ministers of the next generation, Henry Ward Beecher (standing on the right).
288 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848

As the Second Great Awakening grew in force in the 1820s and 1830s, a series of voluntary societies or interdenominational organizations that Beecher helped launch grew in their influence. These societies were not owned by any one religious body but, rather, depended on the voluntary contributions of members of several different religious bodies. They represented a new form of cooperation across traditional religious lines in the service of a larger goal to change the culture of the United States. The American Bible Society distributed Bibles, the American Sunday School Union provided curriculum materials for church-based Sunday schools, and the American Education Society supported the education of ministers. In addition, the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions sent missionaries around the world, including Adoniram Judson and his wife Ann Hasseltine Judson, whose efforts in Burma became role models for generations of foreign missionaries to convert the world to Christianity. Beecher included prominent members of the Congregational, Presbyterian, and Episcopal churches in the leadership of these societies. The underlying mission of all of these societies was moral reform—the creation of a sober, God-fearing, American public.
By the early 1830s, Beecher had become convinced that the key to transforming the nation lay in the Mississippi Valley. He became president of Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati to
fulfill this goal. Beecher helped prepare future ministers, strengthened religious colleges, and placed Protestant pastors in hundreds of Midwestern churches. He also helped create the public school system of Ohio and supported schools and teachers across the Midwest.
The goal of all of this activity was to strengthen the moral sway of Congregational-Presbyterian Protestantism against the individualism of Jacksonian Democrats, Catholics, and other Protestants who disagreed with them. In the world that Beecher and his fellow Protestant evangelists were creating, the separating of church and state meant that specific denominations would not wield political power, but together, these Protestants would help build a culture in which the churches, voluntary societies, and public schools would reinforce common beliefs and practices.
Revivalism and Moral Reform Movements
Most converts in the revivals that preachers like Finney and Beecher led, perhaps three-fourths of them, were women who then prayed and lobbied for their husbands and families to convert. Finney and his closest lieutenant, Theodore Dwight Weld, encouraged women to be active in their religious communities. Where New England churches had urged women to keep silent except at home, the new generation of revivalists welcomed them as prayer leaders and preachers. Such speaking in “promiscuous assemblies,” may have been familiar in Baptist and even Methodist churches, but it was new in the more middle-class Presbyterian and Congregational churches. Women who became religious leaders in the revivals often also became leaders in their communities. The movement demanding womens rights that swept the United States in the 1840s sprang from the same areas of upstate New York that revivalists called the burned-over district (see Chapter 12). The link was not surprising.
For Finney, conversion meant that one needed to show one’s new faith in ethical behavior, and no ethical behavior was more important to him than opposing slavery. Upstate New York’s churches sent revivalist preachers into the rest of the country to preach for the abolition of slavery. For the next 30 years, the Finney-Weld brand of revivalism spread across the country and was one of the streams of abolitionism that inspired Northerners to fight a war to end slavery.
The rights of women and opposition to slavery were not the only reform causes to spring from the revivalism of the Second Great Awakening. Other reformers, inspired by the same forces, began to advocate for important changes in the way prisoners were treated. Too often, they said, overcrowded prisons were simply schools for crime, and the focus on punishment, whatever the original crime, did little to redeem or reclaim prisoners to reenter society. At first, reformers advocated the building of prisons in which each prisoner would be confined to a solitary cell where they would have time to reflect on their past, be taught new habits, and prepare to reenter society. But too often, the solitary confinement led to insanity rather than reform. In response, prison reformers built a new kind of prison in which each prisoner had a separate cell, but also had access to common dining quarters, workshops, and a chapel. In all of these spaces, the authorities sought to teach prisoners a new way of behaving as preparation for reclaiming them. In the 1830s, the New York state penitentiary at Auburn was redesigned to foster the new approach, and soon thereafter, a large new penitentiary at Sing Sing on the Hudson River was built with 1,000 cells plus the common areas. Reformers hoped that the new, more humane approach would change lives and ultimately society. Other states quickly followed in adopting the new models.
Many mentally ill people were treated very much like prisoners before the reforms, and they often found themselves in similar circumstances. Reformers quickly took up the cause of those they said were insane. Perhaps no one equaled Dorothea Dix as a reformer in the treatment of the mentally ill. In 1843, Dix told the Massachusetts fegislature that she was calling their attention “to the present state of Insane Persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience!” Moreover, she had the facts to
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 289
This illustration from an anti-alcohol publication makes the claim that drunkenness was the cause of many problems in society, especially the abuse of women.
prove her point. The result, beginning in Massachusetts, was that a system of state hospitals for the insane replaced the earlier prisons.
Many other reforms also blossomed. Although the campaign against alcohol would reach its peek many decades later, it began during the Second Great Awakening. Lyman Beecher preached temperance sermons that were widely reprinted, including one in which he said, “What then is this universal, natural, and national remedy for intemperance? It is the banishment of ardent spirits from the list of lawful objects of commerce...” Many, including members of Congress took the pledge to stop drinking, the U.S. Army stopped the old tradition of a ration of alcohol, and refusing to drink became a mark of religious observance in many circles. At the same time, the American Peace Society advocated an end to all wars. The American Sunday School Union distributed not only Bible stories, but also basic reading books in places where there were no schools. Schools were opened for those who were deaf and blind. Efforts were made to rescue prostitutes. Countless reforms designed to create a better, more humane, and sometimes more tightly controlled society emerged from the enthusiasm of the awakening.
Utopian Religious Communities
The religious enthusiasm of the early 1800s also inspired untraditional ways of thinking about religious matters. Large American spaces that allowed people to develop their own communities relatively undisturbed and the American emphasis on liberty, even the liberty to be eccentric, made the United States fertile ground for radical experiments and utopian religious communities. Some of these religious experiments were short lived. Others lasted for generations. A few, most of all the Mormons, have continued to the present.
MOTHER ANN LEE AND THE SHAKERS
The founder of the United Society of Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, or the Shakers, was Ann Lee—known as Mother Ann Lee—who before the American Revolution gathered a few supporters in England and came to America in 1774. Lee was convinced that she was receivings special revelation from God that human sexuality was the basis of all sin and celibacy was the only way to live a godly life. Lee inspired Shaker communities in New York and New England. Shaker worship reflected Lee’s spirituality and, according to observers, included, “shaking and singing, hopping and turning, smoking and running, groaning and laughing-Shaker communities at New Lebanon, New Hampshire; Sabbath Day Lake, Maine; and elsewhere thrived, and the Shakers became one of the largest and most successful of the pre-Civil communitarian movements.
290 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
SBlSglMKBiiaMSiBB
In Shaker worship and community life, women and men were kept separate, but all participated in lively music and dance designed to shake sin out of their bodies.
Shaker theology placed Ann Lee on a par with Jesus and committed the society to the equal leadership of women with men. But Shakers were united by their community life more than by theology. They demanded celibacy, a requirement that limited the community’s appeal and prevented increasing membership by means of childbirth. Instead, all new members had to be converts who were attracted to Shaker life. The revivals produced many such converts who sought a deeper spiritual life than they found in traditional churches. Shaker beliefs were reflected in their commitment to making things of beauty, and Shaker furniture remains a reminder of their beliefs.
American Voices
The Shaker Community, “Tis the Gift to be Simple,” 1830s
rhe simplicity and joyfulness of the Shakers have infiltrated American culture in many ways. Shaker furniture, now so popular, was not just a product for them. Mildred Barker, leader of a Shaker Community in Maine, who died in 1990, once reflected, "I almost expect to be remembered as a chair or a table." But Barker reminded those who came to interview her that behind oil of the Shakers' physical artifacts, "There's the religion." And while many of their complex theological ideas have largely been forgotten, the basic joy, humility, and playfulness of the Shakers continue to be remembered in this familiar hymn that dates to the 1830s:
Tis the gift to be simple, 'tis the gift to be free;
Tis the gift to come down where we ought to be;
And when we find ourselves in the place just right,
Twill be in the valley of love and delight.
When true simplicity is gaind,
To bow and to bend we shan't be asham'd To turn, turn will be our delight,
'Till by turning, turning we come round right.
Source: Stephen J. Stein, The Shaker Experience in America (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), p. 191.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What values and priorities are extolled in the hymn?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Why might simplicity, certainty, and humility have been particularly appealing to 1830s Americans? What aspects of the larger society might Shakers have found most disturbing and unwelcome?
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 291
10.2
The things they created, whether furniture, houses, or art, were owned in common, not individually, a requirement that some found as difficult to accept as celibacy.
JOHN HUMPHREY NOYES AND THE ONEIDA COMMUNITY
The Oneida Community also had its roots in the Second Great Awakening and flourished in Oneida, New York, between 1848 and 1879. Its founder and spiritual guide was John Humphrey Noyes, who was born in Vermont in 1811. As a student for the ministry, he became convinced that repentance from sin was not enough and that people should simply stop sinning. Noyes became convinced that all Christians could achieve a state “in which all the affections of the heart are given to God, and in which there is no sin.” Gathering a small community in Putney, Vermont, he expanded his definition of Christian perfectionism to include what he called “complex marriage,” an arrangement in which monogamy was replaced with many sexual companions. Noyes argued that sexual pleasure was a gift from God and that Christianity demanded the sharing of that gift without any exclusive or jealous reservations.
Vermont authorities, however, took a dim view of these sexual practices and beliefs, and Noyes and his followers moved to Oneida, New York, where the community thrived for decades, supported ultimately by producing and selling silverware. Oneida eventually fell victim to Victorian morality and to its dependence on Noyes as its single charismatic leader. Between 1875 and 1879, Oneida was torn by debates as New York authorities began threatening arrests for Oneida’s flouting of the marriage laws. Noyes fled to Canada and the community dissolved although the silver business supported former members for generations.
ROBERT OWEN AND THE NEW HARMONY COMMUNITY
After making a fortune in London, Robert Owen founded a model factory town at New Lanark, Scotland, in which he sought to put the spirit of universal welfare into practice. In the early 1820s, Owen decided to relocate his utopian vision of a community designed to benefit all of it members and establish it in the United States. In early 1825, 900 people arrived at New Harmony, Indiana, where Owen had purchased land. But New Harmony failed within a year. The community could not attract enough skilled workers to make it economically successful. There was tension between those who ran New Harmony and the rest of the community. As one disaffected resident recalled, the “aristocrats” quarreled, and the fields went to ruin. Owen lost most of his fortune, which he had invested in New Harmony, but returned to England to continue to advocate his version of social reform.
f
JOSEPH SMITH AND THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS
Joseph Smith (1805-1844) was as much a product of New York’s burned-over district as Charles G. Finney. Smith was born in 1805 and moved with his family to a farm in Palmyra, New York, when he was age 11. In 1827, word spread along the Erie Canal that Smith had found a treasure that would unlock the Indian history of the area. He had, he said, found golden plates and magical stones known as Urim and Thummim with which to read and translate what was written on the plates by an ancient prophet-historian named Mormon. He published the result, the Book of Mormon, in 1830. With that book, a uniquely American religious tradition was born, one that its followers believed represented a rebirth of true Christianity. Smith, however, did much more than publish a new book; he organized a community. Within a month of the book’s publication, the first Mormon community began to form near Palmyra, New York, with Smith as its leader. Some responded with hos-
• tility to his efforts, even tarring and feathering Smith at one point. But converts seeking religious truth poured in, a temple was built, and the community grew.
In response to the hostility, Smith and the Mormon community moved first to Missouri and then in the late 1830s, to Nauvoo, Illinois, which became the largest and fastest growing city in Illinois because of Mormonism. The city’s 15,000 residents
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
became a virtually autonomous state, and their militia was recognized by state law. But Smith s political involvements and religious teaching, especially his suggestion that all members participate in marriages involving one husband and multiple wives, brought renewed hostility. On June 27, 1844, a mob killed Smith and his brother Hyrum.
With Smith’s death, Brigham Young became the new leader of the Mormons in 1847 and led them on a cross-continent trek to the shores of the Great Salt Lake in what is now Utah. Salt Lake was then on the northern edge of the Republic of Mexico, which was soon to be annexed by the United States. There, far from any governmental authority, they set up settlements in a tight, church-regulated community. They also embraced Smith s revelation that a man could take as many wives as he could support.
But the Treaty of Guadalupe Hildago, which marked the end of the U.S. War with Mexico from 1846 to 1848, brought Salt Lake City and the Mormon community under the control of the U.S. government. For a while, the U.S. government left the Mormons alone, but in 1857, President James Buchanan replaced Young with a non-Mormon territorial governor, and the Mormon War broke out as federal authorities tried to enforce monogamy on the Mormons and the Mormons fought back. In one well-publicized incident, Mormons massacred a group of non-Mormon settlers. Only in 1890, after an intense time of prayer and a new revelation, did the Mormon leadership abandon plural marriage. Relations with the government improved, and Utah became a state in 1896. Of all the new religious communities spawned during the Second Great Awakening, the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints has been the most successful.
Mormons, like those shown in this wagon train, crossed the plains and mountains to get to new homes in Utah.
Transcendentalism
In 1838, far from Salt Lake City or the revivals of New York, Ralph Waldo Emerson gave a speech at Harvard Divinity School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, that had as much impact as any revival sermon. Emerson had been ordained as a Unitarian minister but had resigned when he came to believe that the Lord’s Supper and public prayer were barriers to direct experience of the divine.
In the Divinity School Address, Emerson told an audience of future Unitarian ministers that too often in formal worship, “The soul is not preached.” And he said, “The true preacher can be known by this, that he deals out to the people his life,—life passed through the fire of thought.” Emerson’s call to preach “throbs of desire and hope” rather than formal theology offended most of his audience and he was never invited back to the Divinity School, but the speech represented a new approach to religious life that was developing in America in the 1830s.
While Emerson continued to develop his ideas for another 40 years, the Transcendentalist movement with which he is most associated blossomed in the 1830s. In 1836, a group that came to call themselves the Transcendental Club met at the Boston home of George Ripley, another Unitarian minister, to discuss ideas. The members of the club created a theology that reflected a powerful personal experience of life.
In 1841, under Ripley’s leadership, members of the Transcendental Club founded Brook Farm, a utopian community in West Roxbury, Massachusetts, where the residents sought to support themselves through manual labor. Women and men shared work equally, and an effort was made at true gender equity. But few of the residents of Brook Farm actually knew much about farming, the farm did not prosper, and the community disbanded in 1847. Nevertheless, Emerson’s writings and the Transcendental movement he helped launch reflected an impatience with “old ways” and a desire for direct and immediate experience of the divine that continued to impact American religious life.
10.2
Quick Review How did the increasing diversity of religion in America reflect other political and social changes in the nation?
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 293
DEMOCRATIZED EDUCATION: THE BIRTH OF THE
COMMON SCHOOL
_________________ Explain thG dGVGloprnent of public education as a result of, and in response to, the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
103
The years during which Andrew Jackson dominated American politics were also years in which the nations public school system was radically transformed, though the transformation was mostly the work of Jacksons staunch opponents. Many of the most prominent education reformers were Whigs who did not share Jackson’s vision for American society. They often sought to change the ways schools were organized and conducted for the same reasons they opposed Jackson politically. Schools, Whig educators believed, could build a new American culture more to their liking than the Jacksonian brand of democracy that most school reformers found too individualistic and unlikely to transmit the kind of moral code they thought was essential to a well-regulated national life.
Various individuals with their own agendas contributed to what came to be known as the Common School Crusade. Catherine Beecher sought to empower women by opening the doors for them to become school teachers. Horace Mann, a Whig Party leader, helped launch a new and more tightly organized school system in Massachusetts—a system that came to serve as a model for much of the nation. Ihe transformation of the nation’s schools in this period was a key dynamic of the changing culture of the United States between the 1820s and the 1840s.
Women Become Teachers
In 1835, Catharine Beecher, daughter of the religious leader Lyman Beecher, was already well known for founding the Hartford Female Seminary to help educate women and for her petitions seeking to stop Jackson’s Indian Removal. In her Essay on the Education of Female Teachers published in that year, Beecher argued that women were much better equipped than men to be teachers, but she also wanted to educate them for the work. She saw teaching as an extension of motherhood, a nurturing role: “What is the most important and peculiar duty of the female sex? It is the physical,
, n' "I0 u Very y°un9 women' taught school, most often in one-room schools like this one where ch' dren of 311 ages learned to read, write, count, and then advance through more complex assignments. No all the schools were as comfortable as the one shown here and not all the children were as well behaved.

Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
intellectual, and moral education of children. She continued, “Woman, whatever are
her relations in life, is necessarily the guardian of the nursery, the companion of child-
hood, and the constant model of imitation. It is her hand that first stamps impressions
on the immortal spirit, that must remain forever.” At a time when most teachers were
still men, Beecher argued not only that women actually made better teachers than
men, but also that including women as teachers would expand the supply of teachers
for the country and open the door to a professional life for middle-class women who
had few employment options.
Beecher’s impassioned views reflected those of Emma Willard, who had founded the Troy Female Seminary in 1821 in upstate New York to prepare women to be teachers. Like Beecher, Willard had argued, “There are many females of ability, to whom the business of instructing children is highly acceptable.” She also believed that women should get the same education as men and modeled the curriculum at Troy on what men studied at college, though she added courses on how to teach. In 1837,
Mary Lyon founded Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in Massachusetts to give future female teachers a college education.
New Structures for Schooling
While Catharine Beecher and her colleagues were transforming the gender of the
teaching profession, other reformers sought to transform the structure of schools.
None of these leaders was more important than Horace Mann. In 1836, Mann, a
rising star in the Massachusetts Whig Party, helped shepherd a bill through the
Massachusetts legislature that created a state Board of Education. He then became
the boards full-time, paid secretary. Mann spent the next 12 years advocating tighter
state standards for education, more money for schools and teacher salaries, and a
better education for children. He became the best-known spokesperson for public
education of his generation.
Mann believed in state standards for the schools. He described the schools of Massachusetts as, “so many distinct, independent communities.” Mann meant to change that. He also believed that it was the responsibility of all citizens to pay taxes to support schools; looking at the conditions of the state’s schools when he took office, he did not think that they paid nearly enough at the time in such taxes. Like Beecher and Willard, Mann wanted educated teachers and created a system of state-sponsored teacher preparation schools, called “normal schools,” that offered 1 year of state-funded preparation to any young woman or man who wanted to be a teacher. Mann’s greatest concern, however, was the moral education of the state’s citizens. He believed that there needed to be a public guardian of morality, and since the United States had no state church, that guardian had to be the public school.
While Mann was the best-known educational reformer, almost all Whigs also came to advocate the same changes he did: state systems of education, state support for teacher preparation, and state efforts to ensure a common morality. Like many reformers, Mann and his allies could not understand why anyone would oppose them.
Yet even in Massachusetts, there was opposition. Jacksonian Democrats in the legislature tried to abolish the Board of Education and the office of secretary. They saw the state control that Mann advocated as expensive, unnecessary, and an unwarranted interference by the state in local affairs, which would undermine local support for each town’s school.
Roman Catholics were especially unhappy with the growing influence and cost of the public school system. Catholics saw the public schools as essentially a Protestant venture, something Protestants like Mann could never understand. Mann advocated teaching the Protestant Bible in school “without note or comment,” leaving it to churches or parents to interpret it. But Catholics believed that the Bible should be read in light of the teachings of the Church and not left to individual interpretation.
Chapter 10 Democracy
in the Age of Andrew Jackson 295
10.3
They found anti-Catholic bias in many of the textbooks the public schools used To pay taxes only to have their children read such material outraged them. Citing examples from textbooks that spoke of “deceitful Catholics,” Catholics in New York City wrote that they could not “in conscience, and consistently with their sense of duty to God, and to their offspring” send them to the city’s public schools and requested public funds so that they could operate their own schools. When such funds were denied Catholics in New York and around the country started their own parochial system at their own expense.
The Nation's Textbook: McGuffey's Reader
claws
catch
harks
scratch
J {
L
The j ler. ; p teeth: : she will: she will i
In 1836, the small Cincinnati publishing house of Truman and Smith brought out a new textbook for schools. The first McGuffeys Reader became part of a series, the McGuffey's Primer, McGuffey's Speller, and the First through the Sixth McGuffey's Eclectic Readers. By 1920, when most school districts had turned to other materials, 122 million copies of the books had been sold.
The McGuffey Reader offered lessons in reading and public speaking designed to create a unified, literate, and patriotic society. The Readers reflected the same morality that Mann and Beecher wanted the schools to teach. They included patriotic speeches by Patrick Henry and stories of George Washington as well as tales of the poor boy and his faithful dog or the poor boy who worked hard and made good. The texts also included ethical instruction, for example, don’t steal apples from someone else’stree, and instruction in how to speak and present oneself. The goal was a citizenry that could speak well, participate in a common democratic dialogue, and use a common national language instead of regional dialects.
A story in the Second Eclectic Reader is illustrative of the McGuffey approach. “Henry, the Bootblack,” begins with the story of Henry, “a kind good boy.”
Henry’s “father was dead, and his mother was very poor. He had a little sister about two years old.” One day, Henry found a pocketbook. He could have kept all the money in it, but he found the owner and returned it. The owner then gave him a dollar for doing so. Henry used the dollar to set himself up as a bootblack and he was “so polite that gentlemen soon began to notice him, and to let him black their boots.” When Henry brought home his first fifty cents in earnings his mother responded, “You are a dear, good boy, Henry. I did not know how I could earn enough to buy bread with, but now I think we can manage to get along quite well.” This account is not the kind of success story that would appear fifty years later. In the story, Henry does not go on to own a factory or make a fortune. He is simply a dutiful child who makes his mother happy. The students who read the McGuffey texts were urged to do the same. They were also urged to learn the correct pronunciation and spelling for support, boots, notice, money, and other words in the story. McGuffey was teaching a common morality but also a common American English to all students.
The United States that the Readers portrayed was white, middle class, hard working, and willing to sacrifice for the common good. The Readers also demanded a high standard of reading ability and moved students step by step to attain it. In one-room schoolhouses, often staffed by teachers with little training, which was the national norm throughout the 1800s, a teacher could encourage different stu dents to move from Reader to Reader in careful order and be confident that, by the time the student had mastered the Sixth Eclectic Reader, he or she would be fluent in the English language and in the nation s

( »
OF THE ECLECTIC HEHEIS.
See how this dog stands on his feet. He Wants to play with John.
A dog has four feet. A dog and a cat can see in the dark.
Hogs keep watch at night and hark, lliey bark most when the moon shines.
A dog will chase a sheep, or a hog, or a co5V? an(j bjte it. If you are kind to dog, he will not bite you.
ike	Riders were filled with patriotic speeches and stories
Ictr,.e. °ne S °Wr> here, designed to teach morality, in addition to istruction on	,
^-ummon ways of pronouncing key terms.
296 Part IV
Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
ethical norms. Not everyone agreed with the specific values the Readers taught, and reformers were often tone-deaf to complaints, but the public schools and their teachers shaped American culture as significantly as any of the religious, political, or commercial ventures of the Age of Jackson.
Quick Review Why might education be increasingly important in an expanding country?
CONCLUSION
Andrew Jackson was like no other president before him. He had no connection to the Founding Fathers, either by blood, class, or any similar privilege. Jackson was determined to make the presidency the center of American government, believing that the government should be an expression of his agenda and of his party. In his two terms as president, Jackson successfully prodded Congress to bend to his will or used executive power to realize his goals, despite fierce opposition. A complex American leader with a long-standing distrust of centralized government, his views were reflected in his actions: an Indian Removal policy that forced thousands of Native Americans out of their ancestral homes in Illinois, Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida and on to new lands in present-day Oklahoma; opposition to the Second Bank of the United States because he thought the federal government should have no role in banking, issuing paper currency, or expanding credit; and the Nullification Crisis in which Jackson successfully challenged South Carolina’s efforts to declare federal law null and void in that state. Those actions would have long-lasting effects on the nation.
For many Americans in the decades between 1820 and 1850, the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens were far more important than President Jackson’s policies or opinions. Along with the market revolution that was transforming the physical, commercial, and political landscapes of the United States, the Age of Jackson, as his years in the White House were called, was also a period of social and religious revival and reform. It was the peak of a long-running series of religious revivals known as the Second Great Awakening. This upsurge in religious activity resulted in greater rights for women, stronger opposition to slavery, and radical transformation of the nation’s public schools, whose teachers and moral teachings shaped American culture as significantly as any of the religious, political, or commercial ventures of the Age of Jackson.
CHI R E
Considering the political, economic, and social aspects of the "Age of Jackson," to what extent was the United States in that period different from the beginning
of the 1800s?
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson
Chapter 10 Chapter Review
10.1
JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY
Analyze Jackson's advocacy for Indian Removal, his opposition to the Bank of the United States, his support for a tariff, and the impact of these policies on other Americans.
Review Questions
1.	Comparison
How did Jackson’s vision of the presidency differ from that of his predecessors?
2.	Crafting Arguments
What were Jackson’s most important political priorities? What connections can you make between his policies and his vision of the presidency?
3.	Historical Interpretation
What does the debate over Indian Removal tell you about political divisions in the United States in the 1830s? What groups were most likely to support removal? What groups were most likely to oppose it?
4.	Synthesis
In what ways was the Nullification Crisis part of a longstanding disagreement about the nature of American government that went at least as far back as the debate over ratification of the Constitution?
DEMOCRATIZED RELIGION: THE SECOND GREAT AWAKEN I NG_______________________________________________
Analyze the diversity of American religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
Review Questions
5.	Synthesis
How did the role of religion in American society and culture change between 1800 and 1840? What explains the changes you note?
10*2
6.	Historical Interpretation
What might explain the close connection between calls for religious revival and campaigns for social reform in the 1830s and 1840s?
7.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the various utopian religious com. munities of the early 1800s. What common features die they share? What common forces might have contributes to their emergence?
DEMOCRATIZED EDUCATION: THE BIRTH OF THE COMMON SCHOOL
i 103
Explain the development of public education as a result of, in response to, the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s. i
Review Questions
8.	Contextualization Why did reformers like Catherine Beecher believe women had a natural aptitude for teaching? In what ways did Beecher see teaching as a natural extension of women’s role in the home?
9.	Crafting Arguments
Is it fair to describe Mann’s system of public education, as some of his opponents did, as nothing more than a vehicle for imposing mainstream Protestantism on all Americans? Why or why not?
10.	Historical Interpretation
How did textbooks in The McGuffey Reader series shape the society and culture of the United States in the first half of the 1800s?
298 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
1830-1853
In this painting, Emigrants at Kanesville by William Henry Jackson, a backlog of wagons waits to be ferried across the Missouri River at Council Bluffs, Iowa.
In the summer of 1845, the Democratic Review, a New York City paper edited by John L. O’Sullivan, urged the nation to annex the independent Republic of Texas: "It is time now for opposition to the annexation of Texas to cease,” Sullivan wrote. Texas was a hot topic, and many newspapers were taking the same position. But the Review claimed that including Texas in the United States was an essential part of the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions. Manifest Destiny quickly became a core American belief. It was a mindset that justified the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, the hoped-for U.S. acquisition of the Oregon Territory along with the northern half of Mexico including Texas and California, and a significant influence across the Pacific Ocean.
Manifest Destiny gave a new name to an old idea. Even before the
American Revolution and in growing numbers in the 1790s, white Americans had crossed the Allegheny Mountains in spite of government prohibitions and had established colonies in Kentucky and in the Ohio River Valley. Soon after 1800, others were crossing into Florida and Missouri, both then under Spanish control. In both cases, the settlers were confident that the American army and American government would soon follow. While the first Americans to cross into Texas spoke of loyalty to the
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the idea of Manifest Destiny and the policies of the Polk administration almost doubled the size of the United States in 12 years in spite of opposition from many people in the country.
MANIFEST DESTINY—THE IMPORTANCE OF AN IDEA_________________________________
Explain what Manifest Destiny meant and how it led the United States to involvement in Texas, California, and Oregon.
THE U.S. WAR WITH MEXICO,
1846-1848 Analyze the causes, strategies, and outcomes of the U.S. War with Mexico.
WEST TO THE PACIFIC___________________________________
Analyze the causes and outcomes of U.S. expansion in California and into the Pacific region, including establishing new relationships with Hawaii, China, and Japan.
11.1
11.2
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 299
113
	Significant Dates
1821	Mexico gains independence from Spain First American colony established in Texas
1829	Mexico abolishes slavery, including in Texas
1830	Revolts against Mexican authority begin in Texas
1835	Americans in Texas capture the Alamo, drive out Mexican army
1836	Narcissa and Marcus Whitman help found the first Protestant mission in Oregon Texas declares independence from Mexico Fall of the American forces in the Alamo to Mexican army Treaty of Velasco recognizes independent Republic of Texas Congress passes gag rule forbidding discussion of slavery
1837	Financial Panic of 1837
1842	Webster-Ashburton Treaty resolves U.S.-Canadian border dispute
1844	Treaty of Wang-hsia gives United States open trading rights in China
1845	The term Manifest Destiny becomes popular James K. Polk inaugurated as president U.S. annexation of Texas
1846	Beginning of U.S. War with Mexico
1848	Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ends war with Mexico Gold Rush in California
1849	Thoreau's Civil Disobedience published
1851	Herman Melville's Moby Dick published
1853	Commodore Perry enters Tokyo Harbor, begins opening Japan to United States Gadsden Purchase, last acquisition of land in continental United States
Manifest Destiny
The doctrine, first expressed in 1845, that the expansion of white Americans across the continent was inevitable and ordained by God and was a means to spread Protestant Christianity and Jacksonian Democracy to more people.
Republic of Mexico, by 1830, they too were seeking protection from the American government. In all these cases, many in the government were happy to oblige, seeing the movement of colonists as a first step in expanding the nation. Being aware of the nation’s long-term expansion, the power of the idea of Manifest Destiny, and the political and military actions that the nation’s leaders took in the name of that idea is essential to understanding how the nation expanded into the shape it has today. This chapter will explore the political, diplomatic, and military issues involved in turning the idea of Manifest Destiny into a geographic reality.
It is also important to understand how the acquisition of so much new territory in the 1830s and 1840s, as well as other developments in people’s thinking, changed the lives of those who lived in the United States. The population of the country was expanding as dramatically as its geographical borders. Migrants from around the world especially flocked to California to find their fortunes in the gold. Citizens of the Republic of Mexico suddenly found themselves living in the United States because the border had moved, as did American Indians, who rejected the claims of all nations to their lands. Other immigrants came to the already established parts of the nation. In addition, amid the many changes, slaves, supporters and opponents of slavery, and women became increasingly vocal about the issue of freedom and equality. These issues will be explored in Chapter 12. The great territorial expansion of these years and dramatic changes in the makeup and the thinking of people in the United States during the same time period transformed the country and its future.
MANIFEST DESTINY—THE IMPORTANCE OF AN IDEA
Explain what Manifest Destiny meant and how it led the United States to involvement in Texas, California, and Oregon.
ifllli
At the mythical level, Manifest Destiny was seen as the spirit hovering over the westward movement of white settlers, leading them and urging them on whether they came by foot, covered wagon, or stage coach.
11.1
The idea that the United States had a “manifest destiny” led to more than simply acquiring land, though between 1845 and 1848, the United States would almost double in size, from 1.8 million square miles to almost 3 million. Advocates of Manifest Destiny claimed that the United States—with God’s blessing—should rule the heart of North America from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific and from a still-to-be-defined border with British Canada to an even more undefined border with the Republic of Mexico. For O Sullivan and other supporters of Manifest Destiny, it was the nations appointed role to spread not only democracy—in its Jacksonian form—but also to spread Protestant Christianity in place of the Catholicism of Mexico or the native beliefs of American Indians. The same year that O’Sullivan coined the term Manifest Destiny, Illinois Representative John Wentworth told Congress that he “did not believe the God of Heaven...designed that the original States should be the only abode of liberty on earth. On the contrary, he only designed them as the great center from which civilization, religion, and liberty should radiate and radiate until the whole continent shall bask in their blessing. That belief, held by many beyond Wentworth, that the United States was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy to the planet and especially North America—was a driving force in the push for new lands in the 1840s.
Many Americans supported versions of Manifest Destiny for their own reasons. Land speculators and those promoting the extension of the nation’s railroads wanted to exploit the vast lands in the West. Farmers dreamed of starting over in rich—and cheap new lands. Workers believed that rapid national expansion would guarantee industrial profits and thus their jobs, or give them a chance to start over if necessary. Protestant leaders and missionaries saw U.S. control of the new lands as an opportunity to ensure that a Protestant United States, not a Catholic Mexico, controlled the continent. Manifest Destiny also referred to a patriotic belief that the nation had a divine mission to become a world power.
and a National Identity, 1800-1848
In contrast, many other Americans opposed the whole idea of a “manifest destiny.” Democrats tended to support expansion, but most Whigs, led by Henry Clay, had grave reservations. Clay’s goal was not necessarily a larger country but a better developed one with roads, canals, railroads, and industries knitting it together and ensuring its prosperity. Antislavery advocates opposed the acquisition of more land, especially Texas, since they were certain that new lands meant new slave states. However, some proslavery advocates, notably South Carolina Senator John C. Calhoun, wanted Texas but worried that other incorporated lands, especially California and Oregon, might become free states peopled by darker-skinned citizens, which would shift power away from the white slaveholding regions.
Some Americans also saw the violence associated with expansion as simply wrong. Many residents of the lands from Texas to California did not want to become part of the United States at all. Antonio Maria Osio spoke for those who did not want to become U.S. residents when he described himself as “a Californio who loves his country and a Mexican on all four sides and in my heart.” He opposed the annexation of California to the United States, and when it happened, he left, eventually settling in Baja California so that he could to remain a citizen of Mexico.
While many Americans debated Manifest Destiny in the Congress, the press, and the pulpits, other Americans, especially trappers and farmers, moved into the regions, just as a generation before the same types of people had expanded beyond the Mississippi. Regardless of whether the United States, Mexico, or Britain claimed the land, these frontiersmen and women were confident that, in time, their government would follow them. Most of all, they moved into Texas (see Map 11-1).
The Birth of the Texas Republic
The tensions between Americans living in Texas and the Mexican government that governed it had been building even before Mexico gained its independence from Spain in 1821. When the United States purchased Louisiana from France in 1803, the western
Chapter 11
Californio
Person of Spanish descent—and after 1821, citizen of Mexico—living in California.
Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 301
300 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land,
T
Saltillo MAP 11-1 Trade networks between Mexico, Texas, and the United States. Mexico (and before it, Spain) had established settlements and trade networks throughout its sparsely populated northern territories. Texas trade ran not only south from San Antonio and Goliad in Texas to Monterrey and other trading centers in Mexico but also east into the United States. Separate networks connected the heartland of Mexico with its settlements in Santa Fe and Taos in New Mexico, with Tucson in the future Arizona, and with the missions and presidios along the coast of California.
San Francisco n San Jose Santa Cruz (Branciforte);
San Carlos de Monterey
PACIFIC OCEAN
"f* Mission B Presidio • Town
-----Present-day political boundaries
—— Principal road
Present state names and boundaries provided for orientation Indian communities, including the New Mexico Pueblos, are not shown
Tejanos
People of Spanish or Mexican descent born in Texas.
border of the territory was disputed. Spain insisted it was the Sabine River (the current border between Louisiana and Texas), but French officials hinted that the United States might claim territory further west. Jefferson had wanted Louisiana to include all of the land from modern-day Texas to the Rio Grande River, but he was not prepared to fight Spain over it. In the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded Florida to the United States, along with Spanish claims to Oregon, in exchange for U.S. recognition of the Sabine River as the border between U.S. Louisiana and Spanish Texas, though some in Congress criticized the treaty for that reason. Despite treaties, however, Americans still crossed the Sabine in the early 19th century settling in Texas.
Soon after the Adams-Onis Treaty was signed, a revolutionary uprising began in Mexico. Like the people of the United States, most Mexican citizens wanted to be free of control by a European power. The Mexican revolution against Spanish rule, which lasted from 1810 to 1821, was long and bloody and decimated the Mexican economy In Texas, the Mexican population, people known as Tejanos, fell from 4,000 in 1800 to 2,500 in 1821. Comanche and Apache tribes dominated large parts of Texas, and
much of the desert was vacant of any human habitation. Nevertheless, after 1821, Mexico had won its independence.
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
With the establishment of the Republic of Mexico, two independent republics— the English-speaking, overwhelmingly Protestant United States in the north and the Spanish-speaking and mostly Catholic Republic of Mexico to the south—bordered each other at the Sabine River, with settlers from one living in the territory of the other.
Even before Mexican independence, the Spanish government had given Missouri merchant Moses Austin permission to start a colony in Texas, believing that more settlers—whatever their origin—would help stabilize a border area that was far from the population centers of either Mexico or the United States. In 1821, Moses’s son Stephen F. Austin, along with Erasmo Seguin, a Tejano with liberal political views, rode into Texas to build the new settlement. A month later, Austin and his party learned that Mexico had won its independence. Austin then went to Mexico City where he met with Mexico’s new leader Agustin de Iturbide and announced, “I make a tender of my services, my loyalty, and my fidelity to the Constitutional Emperor of Mexico.” Austin’s physical presence in Mexico City and willingness to make an oath of allegiance to the new nation impressed the new government. In April 1823, Austin received confirmation of his claims to a huge swath of land in Texas and his right to act as an empresario, or colonizing agent, for this land. He was the only American to get such rights.
At first, the new American colony grew slowly, but Austin continued to recruit settlers. The Mexican government, aware that it could do little to stop settlement and anxious for a buffer against Indian tribes and the United States, hoped that settlers in Texas would create a stable population of loyal citizens.
Few Europeans and even fewer Mexicans moved into Texas, but Americans came in large numbers. The Tejano community was overwhelmed by the newly arrived Americans. By 1830, 20,000 American colonists had arrived and had brought 2,000 slaves with them. The Americans generally ignored the requirement that they convert to Catholicism, though they did not build Protestant churches, and most absolutely refused to free their slaves in spite of the fact that Mexico had abolished slavery in 1829 and expected the residents of Texas to obey that decree. One American visitor to Texas, Amos Parker, wrote, “A person may travel all day; and day after day, and find Americans only.” Those in the Tejano community were also divided. Many Tejanos profited from trade with the Americans and identified with their independent streak. Others clung to their connection to Mexico. Distance, difficult travel conditions, and an unstable government in Mexico City with more pressing concerns closer to home allowed an American community to develop in Texas that was officially governed by one set of laws but lived by its own rules (see Map 11-2).
The Mexican government’s benign neglect of the American community in Texas ended in 1830 when the Mexican Congress closed Texas to further American immigration and the importation of slaves. Mexico also insisted that trade be routed through established ports further south in Mexico rather than directly between Texas and the United States. The government stationed more soldiers in Texas to enforce the new rules. Austin was stunned, and revolts broke out in the English-speaking colonies, a few of which drew Tejano support.
In 1832 Mexican troops defeated an American effort to take control of an army garrison, but in October, American colonists met at San Felipe and called for autonomy for Texas within the Republic of Mexico. In 1833, they organized an army under the command of Sam Houston and sent Austin to Mexico City to negotiate for them. Tejanos were not represented in these meetings, and most of the 5,000 Tejanos probably opposed these actions. But by now, there were 30,000 Americans in Texas, and the Tejanos were greatly outnumbered. Austin had little success in Mexico City. He was arrested in the fall of 1833 and at the time of his release from jail in the summer of 1835 he wrote, “War is our only recourse. There is no other remedy.” Most Americans in Texas seemed to agree.
empresario
An agent who received a land grant from the Spanish or Mexican government in return for organizing settlements.
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 303
of war in June 1812, it passed by the smallest margin of any U.S. declaration of war-79-49 in the House and 19-13 in the Senate. The nation was far from unanimous in its commitment to war, and the war did not go well.
Madison was confident that the war would be quick and cost little in terms of money or American lives. He was terribly wrong. The attack on Canada was a disaster. Jefferson and Madison, with their commitment to a small government and modest taxes, had kept the army weak while many in Congress who voted for war had also voted against every military appropriation in the time leading up to the war. Far fewer of the people in Canada, English or French, wanted to become part of the United States than the Americans expected. In addition, the British army was strong and had been cultivating Indian alliances.
In July 1812, Detroit fell to British soldiers and Indians led by Tecumseh, and an American attack on British forts on the Niagara River failed. Far from taking Canada, the opening battles of the war had left the Northwest more open to attack by the British and Tecumseh’s tribal alliance. Tecumseh is still remembered as a hero in Canada for his role in defending that country. Battles along the frontier were brutal. The Kentucky militia scalped British soldiers, and Indians scalped American settlers. Both sides complained of atrocities.
At first, the Royal Navy enforced a much tighter blockade on the Atlantic coast than Jefferson’s embargo had ever accomplished, wrecking the U.S. economy. British landing parties attacked coastal towns at will. However, an American naval victory on Lake Erie by ships under the command of Oliver Hazard Perry gave the country a new hero. Shortly after, Tecumseh was killed in October 1813 when the U.S. Army won a significant victory over combined British and Indian forces at the Battle of the Thames in southern Canada. The combined victories brought some safety to the New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio frontier, but all thought of conquering Canada disappeared.
By 1814, the war turned further against the United States. Napoleon’s abdication in April 1814 freed the British for a full-scale fight. In August, British troops raided Washington and burned the Capitol and the White House. First Lady Dolly Madison collected state papers and the famous Gilbert Stuart painting of George
In August 1814, only a short time after 1800 when they had begun serving as the center of the American government, British troops burned both the Capitol building and the White House. The deserted husks of both buildings stood until the war ended and they could be rebuilt.
230 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Washington and fled just ahead of the British. However, on September 13, the British bombardment of Fort McHenry in Baltimore harbor failed to dislodge the American garrison. When Francis Scott Key, who was temporarily being held in British custody, saw that the American flag had not been struck in defeat, he was inspired to write “The Star-Spangled Banner.” That same month, American forces also stopped a British invasion of New York. But stopping invasions was hardly winning the war.
On the Indian front, however, American forces were achieving some important victories. Like the French and Indian War and the American Revolution, the War of 1812 was a disaster for Indians living east of the Mississippi. Tecumseh’s death at the Battle of the Thames ended the fragile coalition he had built and opened all of Ohio and Indiana Territory to rapid white settlement. In the south, at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend in March 1814, Andrew Jackson defeated a Creek and Cherokee alliance, killing close to 1,000 Indian fighters and 2,000 more in subsequent battles, 15 percent of the tribes’ total population. “My people are no more!” the Creek leader Red Eagle, or William Weatherford, said. In the Treaty of Fort Jackson, the Creeks were forced to give up almost 25 million acres in Georgia and Alabama, half of their total land.
While both sides were winning and losing battles, an American peace delegation of Henry Clay, Albert Gallatin, and John Quincy Adams, son of the former president, met with their British counterparts in Ghent, Belgium, to negotiate what would become the Treaty of Ghent. Despite its strong position in the war, Britain, having ended its hostilities with France, was fearing that peace would not last, and it wanted to end its battles with the United States to conserve resources. Initially, the British asked for significant concessions, including a large protected zone for their Indian allies, but the American delegation stalled through much of 1814. Late in the year, fearing the situation with France, the British agreed to a treaty that essentially returned all borders and issues to their status quo before the war began. It was a wise move for them. Napoleon, living in exile on the island of Elba off the Italian coast since his defeat in 1814, returned to power briefly in 1815. He again ruled France until his final defeat by British and German troops at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815. If the British had lost at Waterloo, and the battle was a close call, it might have been because their best troops were in North America.
Even as the Ghent negotiations were taking place, Federalists in New England were taking actions against the war. Many New Englanders saw little value in the territorial expansion of the country and were convinced that new lands would only mean new Democratic-Republican representatives in Congress. Even more, the war had devastated the New England economy, which was dependent on international shipping. In protest, New England governors ordered their state militias to serve only within the borders of their own states. In December 1814, Federalist delegates from across New England convened the Hartford Convention in Hartford, Connecticut, to demand peace and consider New England’s secession from the Union if peace did not come quickly. While a majority of the delegates ultimately opposed secession, the convention insisted on the right of nullification, the right of state governments to impede Congressional actions within their own boundaries, and proposed amendments to the Constitution to protect New England’s power. Delegates to the convention expected the Madison administration to give in to their demands, but when news arrived of Jackson’s victory in New Orleans and then the peace treaty, the convention did more to discredit the Federalist Party than support their cause. Nevertheless, it signaled the level of hostility to what many came to call “Mr. Madison s War.
The war’s final dramatic Battle of New Orleans was fought after the peace treaty was already signed but before news of it had reached Jackson or the opposing British army. The British planned to attack New Orleans so they could win control of the Mississippi River and cut U.S. trade on it. Major General Sir Edward Pakenham and his 8,000 troops were battle-hardened from years of fighting the French, but in New Orleans, they faced Jackson’s 4,700 American troops, a collection of regular militia, Tennessee and Kentucky volunteers, and pirates and smugglers under the command
8.4
Treaty of Ghent
A treaty signed in December 1814 between the United States and Britain that ended the War of 1812.
Hartford Convention
A meeting of Federalist delegates from the New England states to protest the continuation oftheWar of 1812.
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 231
of the infamous Jean Lafitte. On January 8, 1815, Pakenham’s troops marched straight into a line of fire organized by Jackson’s army. When, after hours of fighting, the British called for a truce, almost 700 British soldiers had been killed and 1,400 wounded. Of the Americans, 8 were killed and 13 wounded. It was one of the great victories of the war, and it made Jackson a hero and would help make him president. And, though it came after the peace treaty, it helped convince the British that they should, indeed, honor the terms of the treaty, which they might not have done if they had taken New Orleans (see Map 8-2).
Far more Americans, Indians, and British soldiers and sailors died in the War of 1812 than anyone expected when the war began. Indian tribes from the Shawnees to the Creeks would never have significant power again. The United States was virtually bankrupt as a result of the war. Secretary of the Treasury George W. Campbell reported that the government needed to borrow $50 million in the fall of 1814 and resigned when he could not raise it, and the government, for the only time in history, defaulted on its debts.
Nevertheless, news of the Treaty of Ghent and of Jackson’s victory in New Orleans was met with national celebrations. Henry Clay asked, “What is our present situation?” and answered his own question: “Respectability and character abroad—security and confidence at home.” Daniel Webster, who as a representative from Massachusetts had opposed the war, now said:
The peace brought about an entirely new and a most interesting state of things: it opened us to other prospects and suggested other duties. We ourselves were changed, and the whole world was changed.
It was an odd mood for a nation that had lost more battles than it won, come close to bankruptcy, and still had its new capital city laying in ashes. But Webster captured the national mood better than the statistics. The end of Britain’s long war with France also brought an end to Britain’s war with the United States, which had continued in various forms of conflict for 40 years.
Lake Supef..
BRITISH
NORTH AMERICA
(CANADA)
VERMONT
lib. "
■ ILLINOIS "§ i TERRITORY ■
Fort Dearborn Aug 15, 1812^ U
MICHIGAN ' TERRITORY
MASSACHUSETTS
^NNsyu^^7connect1cut
NEW JERSEY
-A" DELAWARE
VIRGINIA’
Michillimackinac V
July.17, 1812
INDIANA
TERRITORY
OHIO
BRITISH
NORTH AMERICA (CANADA)
MICHIGAN /	'	____
TERRITORY '	Queens,on Height,	JA'°
Battle of,he Themes
Octs{i8i3*> -	T	NEW YORK
' TENNESSEE -"
north Carolina;
SOUTH
CAROLINA
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
j Detroit surrendered , /
;	Aug 16,1812	,
LOUISIANA
Fort Mims New Orleans 1813 Jan 8, 1&15~
o u n -iGEORGIA Horseshoe Bend WC Mar 27, 1814
■j|k. American victories
American victories over Indians
■jjk. British victories ■ Forts
American troop movements British troop movements British naval blockade
Fort Mej Fort Defiance
Tippecanoe
INDIANA
TERRITORY
OHIO
* Dayton Cincinnati
Erie
PE NN SYLVANIA
t	~ NEW;
ZJERS6Y
\	T
MARYLA#$
Fort McHenry (Baltimore) -jfc, )
Sept 13-14, 1814 .i s?
Washington. D.C.*	DaAWARE
surrendered and burned# F’
Aug 24, 1814 ’
il^s



o^°’ NEW '



XX > blXde o XXrX ,	Were 6Xempt the fightin9 of the War of 1812'The British navy maintained a highly
successful in batdes on theXat fak	h?'"9 “?T l° " ,Sta" and making il eaSy t0 attack and bum the « pital in 1814. The American navy was more
at thZwar's eS	arm'eS 9	9 Mississippi River from Tippecanoe in Indiana Territory to the final battle in New Orleans
232 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Almost immediately after the war ended, Britain and the United States negotiated a commercial treaty that gave the United States trading rights with Britain and much of Britain s empire. Two years later, in 1817, the Rush-Bagot Treaty guaranteed the disarmament of the Great Lakes, and the year after that another treaty, the Anglo-American Convention, resolved much of the border between the United States and Canada. These treaties were the beginning of long-lasting peace on the northern border of the United States. Indeed, after 1815, both Europe and America settled into a long period of relative peace and mutual prosperity.
In spite of all the complaints about the war, the years during which the region’s ports were closed were a time when some residents began manufacturing enterprises that in the years ahead would fuel rapid industrialization of the region. The United States was considerably more self-sufficient at war’s end than it had ever been before. Still, trade with Europe after the war’s end not only resumed but also quickly exceeded all previous levels. In addition, with peace came further territorial expansion and an extraordinary economic and commercial transition that fundamentally changed the nation. Perhaps most important of all, as Webster and Clay both claimed, the overall effect of the war left the United States a much more confident and proud nation than it had been up to that time. Men like Webster and Clay who were prophets of that confidence and pride, would be national leaders for the next several decades of the nation’s life.
Quick Review Why did the War of 1812 and the events leading up to it split the nation? Based on events in the early 1800s, did Madison make the right decision?
EXPANDING AMERICAN TERRITORY AND INFLUENCE
8.5
Analyze how the United States acquired new territory and increased influence abroad.
In spite of wars and tensions, territorial expansion continued under Jefferson’s handpicked successors, presidents James Madison (1809-1817) and James Monroe (1817-1825) as it had under Jefferson. During this 24 year period, three men who were political allies from the same political party and the same state governed the nation, seeking many of the same goals. Rapid growth fundamentally changed the country. In 1799, Daniel Boone, who had created the first white settlements in Kentucky during the Revolution, moved with his family yet again, this time across the Mississippi River into Spanish-controlled Missouri. Other American settlers from Kentucky followed, seeking ever more land. They assumed that their rights as American citizens went with them and that, eventually, American sovereignty would follow. The Louisiana Purchase in 1803 confirmed Boones assumptions.
Other Americans followed Boone’s pattern in Florida, Texas, New Mexico, and California. Americans ventured far beyond the borders of the United States and expected, often demanded, that the American government continue to protect them and eventually annex new lands to the Union. Many in the government agreed with the settlers, and successive governments, anxious to expand or consolidate regional control, approved.
During the War of 1812, the military victories of William Henry Harrison over the Shawnees in the Old Northwest finalized the opening of Ohio and the future states of Indiana and Illinois to white settlement. At the same time, Andrew Jackson’s defeat of the Creeks and Cherokees in the Old Southwest opened up huge new tracts of land in what would become the states of Mississippi and Alabama. With the lands ceded by Britain in 1783 and the vast Louisiana Purchase now firmly under American control, the most obvious pieces of real estate left for further U.S. annexation after the War of 1812 were the territories known as West and East Florida, still controlled by Spain, and the Oregon Territory that several European powers claimed.
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 233
I
I
Florida and Oregon
West Florida was more or less the southern third of what would eventually be Mississippi and Alabama, while East Florida was what is today the state of Florida. To the United States, foreign control of those lands represented multiple threats. It gave Spain control of most access to the Gulf of Mexico, which was a threat to U.S. shipping. Slaves and others seeking to escape U.S. jurisdiction could easily escape south along a long, unguarded border and melt into the vast, unruly lands of Florida. Seminole Indians, already refugees from the growing white population north of Florida, often welcomed escaped slaves and created new communities that were united in their dislike of the Americans. Americans just north of the Florida border were hungry for more land. Many ignored international boundaries and crossed into Florida to farm and build settlements. These settlers in turn demanded U.S. protection from the Seminoles and Creeks, who had been displaced by the Treaty of Fort Jackson and were determined to defend their new land in Florida.
In 1817, Andrew Jackson, a military hero after his victories in 1814 and 1815, told President James Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams that he could seize Florida in 60 days. The president and Adams did not want a war with Spain but, in language that was deliberately vague, called on Jackson to attack the Seminoles who were harassing white settlers and gave him “full powers to conduct the war in the manner he may judge best.” Given how Jackson had conducted the war against the Creeks, Monroe and Adams knew what their orders meant.
Jackson’s army marched into Florida. They could not find many Seminoles, who were adept at disappearing into swamps and marshes, but they burned their villages and crops. They also seized Spanish forts and arrested a Scots trader named Alexander Arbuthnot and another British subject, Robert Armbrister, charged them with assisting the Seminoles, and after a quick trial executed both. When his troops did find Seminole and Creek leaders, Jackson simply executed them, including Hillis Hadjo, a Creek spiritual prophet who had been part of Tecumseh’s movement.
The execution of Indians did not cause an uproar in the United States or Europe, but an American general executing British subjects in Spanish territory caused an international incident. Monroe and Adams, however, were skillful diplomats. They managed both to distance themselves from Jackson and use what Adams called “the Jackson Magic”—his immense popularity after his victories in the War of 1812—to bring pressure on Spain.
In fact, Spain did not care much about Florida but did have serious concerns about the independence movements in the Spanish colonies in Mexico and South America. The Spanish authorities wanted assurance that the United States would not aid or recognize these revolutions. Spain was also deeply worried about its control of the land from Texas to California. It was more than willing to trade Florida for assurances about Texas and the revolutions further south. Monroe briefly considered making a bid for Texas, but he decided that it was more trouble than it was worth and agreed to the treaty.
Instead of pursuing a claim to Texas, Monroe and Adams decided to ask Spain for its support in the areas that Lewis and Clark had explored. Spain, Great Britain, and Russia all claimed the same territory along the Pacific coast known as Oregon. By the late 1700s, explorers from New Spain were making claims as far north as Alaska. At the same time, Russian fur traders and explorers had established permanent Russian settlements, complete with Orthodox churches, in Alaska and almost as far south as San Francisco. British sea captains, notably James Cook in the 1770s, had explored the Oregon coast. British explorers coming overland from Canada made land claims, among them the Hudson’s Bay Company trading post at the mouth of the Columbia River, which represented the largest European settlement in the region. An earlier U.S. claim, based on Lewis and Clark’s explorations in 1805, was weak by comparison, and there were no U.S. settlements in Oregon. Of course,
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
1
the native peoples of the region had little use for any of the claims, though they traded with all the claimants. Nevertheless, despite its weak claim, the United States had an interest in Oregon. While some in Congress thought Oregon was far too distant and barren to be of interest, Adams—prompted by the merchant and fur trader John Jacob Astor—saw the value of an American presence at the mouth of the Columbia River, not only for access to the fur trade there but as a way to enter the Pacific trade with Asia.
In the 1819 Adams-Onis Treaty with Spain, Spain not only ceded Florida to the United States but also agreed to transfer Spanish rights to the Oregon Territory to the United States. It was a significant accomplishment. The United States paid $5 million in Spanish debts, and the deal was done. All of Florida was now a U.S. territory. While the United States was negotiating with Spain, it was also negotiating with Great Britain about Oregon. In 1818, Adams negotiated the Anglo-American Convention in which Britain and the United States agreed to joint control of the Pacific Northwest for 10 years and to resolve other issues in the future. The two treaties with Spain and Britain gave the United States as strong a claim to Oregon as either Britain or Russia, a claim it would not forget. Just before he ended his tenure as Secretary of State, Adams agreed to an 1824 treaty with Russia that set the border of Alaska much farther north, leaving it to the United States and Britain to resolve questions about Oregon, which they finally did; only in 1846 (see Map 8-3).
Adams-Onis Treaty
An 1819 treaty between the United States and Spain that led to American acquisition of Florida and American rights in the Oregon Territory in return for a $5 million payment to Spain.
8.5
i

Biyiillll
jIOIhISIsi
AP8-3
Expanding Borders, 1817-1823. During his term as secretary of state, John Quincy Adams .gotiated a series of treaties that established the border between Maine and the Louisiana Territory d British Canada as well as created a joint U.S,British ownership of Oregon, and also acqu.red Flonda >m Spain. Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 235
The Monroe Doctrine
Monroe Doctrine
A declaration by President James Monroe in 1823 that the Western Hemisphere was to be closed off to further European colonization and that the United States would not allow European interference in the internal affairs of independent nations anywhere in the Americas.
Having taken Florida and asserted a claim to Oregon, the United States agreed—for the time being—to stay out of Spain’s way in Texas and California. Nevertheless, the Monroe administration took further steps to consolidate U.S. power in the Americas. In 1822, despite earlier promises to Spain, the United States officially recognized the new independent states of Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. If Latin America was, in fact, going to be independent of Spain, then the United States meant to be both the regions benefactor and prime trade partner.
Then, going a big step further in a speech to Congress in December 1823, President Monroe declared that, henceforth, the United States would not allow European intervention or the acquisition of any new territory by a European power in North and South America. Coming less than a decade after the United States had almost lost its independence in the War of 1812, it was a bold announcement. A complex set of international developments led Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams to formulate this stance, which became known as the Monroe Doctrine.
On the Pacific coast, Russian Tsar Alexander I was pressing Russian claims not only to Alaska but also to much of the Oregon Territory in the Pacific Northwest. In 1821, Alexander issued an imperial edict that claimed much of the Pacific coast and gave the Russian-American Company the right to trade there. The Russians threatened to confiscate American ships that traveled too far north, even though more American than Russian sailors were actually taking the sea lions and whales and trading with the Alaskan natives. Nevertheless, for the United States, Russian actions represented a dangerous European intrusion.
Halfway across the world, Greek patriots, borrowing language from the American Revolution, declared independence from the Ottoman Empire, and liberal constitutionalists briefly took power in Spain. The Greek and Spanish revolts were tricky for Monroe and Adams. Many Americans were sympathetic with the Greeks, but the administration also wanted good relationships with the Ottomans. In addition, American sentiment was on the side of a revolution in Spain. These situations in
Russian claims to Alaska dated back to the 1700s, but by the 1820s, the Russians were building up colonies, including their largest one in Sitka, Alaska. These outposts, complete with Russian Orthodox churches, fostered trade with indigenous Alaskans and provided fresh supplies for ships taking fish and sea lions off the coast.
236 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Europe, though not the center of American concern, still had to be responded to carefully, given the strength of public opinion. Much more pressing, however, was the revolutionary activity in the Americas. Taking the wrong side in the revolutions of Latin America could hurt the United States politically and economically for a long time to come while little could be gained from interfering in Europe.
At the tense moment when the United States was considering ways to respond to Russian pressure and to revolutions around the world, British Foreign Secretary George Canning proposed a joint British-American declaration in which both nations would oppose European intervention in the Americas, including efforts to restore Spain’s control, and that neither Great Britain nor the United States would have any territorial interests in the Americas. Canning’s proposal was a problem for Monroe and Adams. They did not want Spain to reassert power in the Americas, and Britain’s influence would be helpful in preventing it. But both the president and his secretary of state had their eyes on eventual U.S. takeover of parts of the Spanish Empire, from Texas to California and perhaps Cuba. Canning’s hands-off agreement would jeopardize long-term American interests.
In the end, Monroe and Adams concluded that they would leave it to the Europeans to deal with Greece and Spain and essentially declared noninvolvement in the “internal affairs of Europe.” On the other hand, they used President Monroe’s December 2, 1823, message to Congress to say that any nation of the Americas that had assumed “free and independent conditions” would “henceforth not be considered as subjects of colonization by any European power.” Many Europeans were amazed at what they saw as the arrogance of the new and still relatively weak United States. It was not clear that the country could enforce the new policy. But the Monroe Doctrine, which began as a simple diplomatic maneuver, became a bedrock of U.S. foreign policy. The independence not only of the United States but of all of the independent Americas from European control was, it seemed, the country’s business. The new policy had no impact on Britain’s long-standing control of Canada or Russia’s dominance of Alaska or, indeed, on those colonies that Spain still claimed in Latin America. But it did announce that the United States would oppose any new colonies anywhere in the Americas. With the Monroe Doctrine, the U.S. government was again reflecting Jeffersonian pragmatism. It might be a small country of farmers, but the United States was claiming vast new influence in all of North and South America. It was a diplomatic expansion that was being matched by an era of economic expansion, growth that was unimagined when Thomas Jefferson took the oath of office in 1801.
8.5
Quick Review How did the outcome of the War of 1812 allow the U.S. government to pursue its expansionist goals and issue the Monroe Doctrine?
CONCLUSION
When Thomas Jefferson became president of the United States in 1801, much of the country’s population, cities, seaports, agriculture, industry, indeed, much of its economy, was contained within the original 13 states. Within the next 20 years, under his leadership and that of handpicked successors James Madison and James Monroe, the country’s territorial claims would extend to the Pacific Ocean. Much of this growth originated in Jefferson’s republican beliefs and his agrarian ideal of a nation of independent farmers rather than a nation run by any elites.
Significant political and social developments also occurred during the first two decades of the 1800s. With the U.S. Supreme Court’s Marbury v. Madison decision in 1803, the Court essentially gave itself the authority to decide the constitutionality of any law passed by Congress. Religion played an increasing role in society, even as
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 237
the last states ended their support for specific churches. Many Protestant groups made significant new gains among both white and black adherents with revivals in what came to be known as the Second Great Awakening.
The Louisiana Purchase opened up trade along the Mississippi River and through New Orleans. Lewis and Clark led an expedition to explore the huge expanse of new U.S. territory, even venturing beyond its scope to reach the Pacific Ocean. Their explorations, aided greatly by various Indian tribes, revealed tremendous potential for future American growth.
Tensions leading up to the War of 1812 began during Jefferson’s term and came to a head under the administration of Madison. Ultimately, the inconclusive war resolved issues that had limited U.S. development for decades, and launched a new period of growth for the country. It was the last war ever fought between the United States and Great Britain. It was also the last war in which Indian tribes were allied with another nation against the United States, and afterward, the United States dealt with Native Americans as an “internal matter” rather than a focus of foreign policy.
Although the cost was high in terms of lives lost, money spent, and economies devastated, the end of the war left the United States more confident, proud, and self-sufficient than ever before. With peace came further territorial expansion, especially a series of treaties between 1817and 1823 that established the border with Canada, gave the nation joint ownership of the Oregon Territory with Great Britain, and gave the country control of Florida. The end of the war also launched an extraordinary economic and commercial transition that fundamentally changed the nation and transformed the lives of Americans. The bold new confidence of the United States, reflected in the Monroe Doctrine declaring that there could be no new European claims on any lands in North or South America, surprised the world.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
What are the most significant differences between the United States in 1800 and the United States in 1823? Why are these differences more important than others?
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Chapter 8 Chapter Review
8.1
JEFFERSON AND THE REPUBLICAN IDEAL
Explain how Jefferson's republicanism shaped and reflected the nation's democratic culture.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
What did Americans in the early 1800s mean by the terms equality and independence7. What role did these terms play in shaping their social and political ideals?
2.	Crafting Arguments
Defend or refute the following statement: Thomas Jefferson, in both his policy choices and personal life, embodied the spirit of republicanism in the early 1800s. What evidence can you present to support your position? What evidence might support a different argument?
3.	Comparison
How did the political culture of the United States in the early decades of the 1800s differ from the political culture of the late 1700s? How would you explain the differences you note?
THE IDEAL OF RELIGIOUS FREEDOM___________________________
Explain how Americans applied new individualist ideals in their religion and how the expansion of faith-based organizations supported, yet also challenged, Jeffersonian republicanism.
Review Questions
4.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the views of Thomas Jefferson and Lyman Beecher on the relationship between church and state. What conflicting values were at the heart of their disagreement?
5.	Historical Interpretation
When some historians have described the United States as being built on faith in “dynamic democracy” and “evangelical religion,” what did they mean? Is this description an accurate interpretation of U.S. history in the years from 1800 to 1820?
6.	Crafting Arguments
Why did African-Americans, both slave and free, develop their own segregated religious institutions and gatherings over the course of the early 1800s? What needs might such churches and gatherings have met that white churches did not?
8.2
8.3
BEYOND THE MISSISSIPPI: THE LOUISIANA PURCHASE AND THE EXPEDITION OF LEWIS AND CLARK_______________________
Explain what effects the Louisiana Purchase and the westward expansion had on how Americans saw themselves.
Review Questions
7.	Chronological Reasoning
How did events in Europe and Haiti create the opportunity for the United States to acquire the Louisiana Territory?
8.	Comparison
Compare and contrast race relations in New Orleans and the rest of the United States during the early 1800s.
THE WAR OF
1812 8.4
Analyze the causes and impact of the War of 1812.
Review Questions
9.	Chronological Reasoning
Trace the growing tensions between the United States and Britain between 1783 and 1812. What events were most crucial in propelling the two nations toward war?
10.	Historical Interpretation
How would you explain the sectional divide over the War of 1812? Why did the war find the most support in the southern and western states and territories and the least support in New England?
11.	Synthesis
What were the long-term consequences of the war? Is it fair to describe the War of 1812 as an inconclusive war? Why or why not?
EXPANDING AMERICAN TERRITORY AND INFLUENCE
Analyze how the United States acquired new territory and increased influence abroad.
Review Questions
12.	Crafting Arguments
Evaluate the role of individual American settlers in shaping American foreign policy in the early 1800s. How did the desire of Americans to move beyond the boundaries of the United States create both opportunities and challenges for the federal government?
13.	Historical Interpretation
In what ways did the articulation of the Monroe Doctrine represent a turning point in American history? What light does the doctrine shed on the vision of America’s future shared by the doctrine’s supporters?
8.5
Chapter 8 Creating a New People, Expanding the Country 239
intensive, and much work was required afterward to prepare the harvest for market. Because of the value of the cotton crop and increasing demands for it, there was constant pressure to work harder and no end to the punishment for those who did not produce as expected.
While Bibb and thousands of other slaves cultivated the cotton, young women working in the mills, or textile factories, of Lowell, Massachusetts, turned it into cloth to be sold around the world. An anonymous worker described her life in a mill:
Since I was between seven and eight years old, I have been employed almost without intermission in a factory, which is almost 18 years....I do not wonder at your surprise that the operatives were worked in the summer season, from five in the morning till seven in the evening....The time we are required to labor is altogether too long. It is more than our constitutions can bear. If any one doubts it, let them come into our mills of a summer’s day, at four or five o’clock, in the afternoon, and see the drooping, weary persons moving about, as though their legs were hardly able to support their bodies.
North or South, for slaves in fields and workers in factories, cotton was wearying work. For some, cotton brought extraordinary wealth as “King Cotton” came to dominate the U.S. economy, but for others, drudgery permeated life. In one way or another, the rise and dominance of the cotton industry affected almost all Americans.
The transformation of the U.S. economy immediately after the War of 1812 involved many changes that made cotton dominant, including new inventions like cotton gins and steamboats, new institutions like corporations, and a different kind of bank—all of which worked together to expand the national economy. These changing economic and social structures also affected the political scene. The new cotton-based economy made slaves much more valuable and slave owners more anxious to defend slavery. At the same time, many northerners, including northerners in cotton industries, became more hostile to slaveholding, which led to deep national divisions.
Significant Dates
1794 Eli Whitney patents the cotton gin
1812	Francis Cabot Lowell returns from England after memorizing plans for Manchester's mills
1813	Boston Manufacturing Company chartered to build mills in United States
1815	The end of the War of 1812 launches era of economic prosperity
1816	Beginning of "Alabama Fever"— development of Alabama and Mississippi cotton plantations
1817	New York legislature authorizes construction of Erie Canal
1819	Financial panic
Dartmouth College v. Woodward and McCulloch v. Maryland Supreme Court cases
1820	Missouri Compromise
1823	Lowell, Massachusetts, laid out as a new mill town
1824	John Quincy Adams elected	president
after disputed election
1825	Erie Canal completed
1828	Tariff of Abominations
Andrew Jackson elected president
9.1
9.2
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the U.S. economy brought about by the rapid expansion of cotton production, other commercial and financial developments, and the impact of these changes on U.S. political life.
CREATING THE COTTON ECONOMY
Explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the
lives of diverse people in the United States.
COMMERCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND TRANSPORTATION
Analyze the technological and financial changes that
led to the emergence of a new market economy in the United States.
FROM THE ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS TO THE POLITICS OF DIVISION
This picture of large bales of cotton being loaded onto steamships by slave labor reflects much of the economic development of the nation in the decades after the end of the War of 1812.
The end of the War of 1812, Andrew Jackson’s victory at New Orleans, the American takeover of Florida, and the Monroe Doctrine were all far from primary concerns of many Americans in the years after 1815. Something much closer to home—cotton—was transforming their lives. The rapid growth of cotton production changed the lives of more Americans, whether or not they were directly involved in cotton production, than any other development between 1800 and the Civil War. Cotton transformed the nation’s physical, commercial, and political landscape.
Henry Bibb, a former slave, described what cotton meant to him and his fellow slaves on a Louisiana cotton plantation that had only recently been developed:
The object of blowing the horn for them two hours before day, was, that they should get their bit to eat, before they went to the field, that they need not stop to eat but once during the day....I have often heard the sound of the slave driver’s lash on the backs, of slaves, and their heart-rending shrieks....I have known the slaves to be so much fatigued from labor that they could scarcely get to their lodging places from the fields at night.
CREATING THE COTTON ECONOMY
9.3
_ —..	jyiuiilauum ui me ever expaiw
cotton-growing regions of the nation knew little respite from the fati ing labor. They had to clear the land before they could plant, and o planted, the cotton plants needed almost constant care. The harvest Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of diverse people in the United States.
Cotton’s dominant role in the economy came about quickly. In 1800, a few southern
plantations grew enough cotton to make cloth for their own use and ship a few bags
to England, but the dominant plantation cash crops were rice, indigo, tobacco, and in
southern Louisiana, sugar. But after the War of 1812, cotton quickly outstripped every
other American export and remained a major American industry until the 1930s.
Demand and Technology
Two developments in the late 1790s set the stage for the rapid expansion of cotton
production in the United States. First, during this period, many Europeans came to
prefer cotton clothing to the wool or linen that had clothed them for generations.
Cotton was cooler and more comfortable than wool, and it was getting cheaper. Most
of Europe’s cotton came from India via Great Britain’s East India Company, but India
could not produce enough cotton to meet Europe’s growing demand.
The second development was a set of technological changes that launched the
worldwide expansion of cotton. In England in 1733, John Kay invented a “flying
shuttle” that made weaving cloth much faster and allowed a single weaver to handle a
loom that previously required many weavers. In 1764, James Hargreaves invented the
spinning jenny, which could run multiple spindles, each spinning cotton into thread.
By 1800, a single jenny could be seen operating up to 120 spindles at once. In 1769,
Richard Arkwright patented a “water frame” that used waterpower to drive the spin-
ning process, a major step toward mass production, while James Watt’s coal-powered
