CHAPTER 24
The World the War Created, 1945-1952
The United States in 1945
The Cold War Begins
Politics, 1948 and 1952
CHAPTER 25
Complacency and Change, 1952-1965
Eisenhower's America, America's World
A
Culture on the Move Race and Civil Rights
CHAPTER 26
Lives Changed, 1961—1968
New Voices, New Authorities
Camelot, the White House and Dallas—The Kennedy Administration The Coming of Lyndon B. Johnson
CHAPTER27
Rights, Reaction, and Limits, 1968-1980
The New Politics of the Late 1960s
The Movements of the 1960s and 1970s
The Culture Wars of the 1970s
Politics, Economics, and the Impact of Watergate
1945-1952
• <	£ fA‘
Members of 11th Airborne Division kneel on the ground as they watch the mushroom cloud of a 1951 atomic bomb test in Nevada.Threat of the new weapon hung over the world during the Cold War.
CHAPTER
OBJECTIVE
n August 6, 1945, the White House released a statement from President Harry Truman:
Sixteen hours ago an American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima.... It is an atomic bomb. It is a harnessing of the basic power of the universe. The force from which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those who brought war to the Far East.
Thus began the atomic age, a new and previously unimagined era. The bomb brought World War II to a quick end, but it also launched the United States and the world into an uncharted arena. For people living in the United States in 1945, that announcement was but one of many extraordinary changes that year.
In early May, less than a month after Roosevelt’s death on April 12, Nazi Germany surrendered. In June, the United Nations, a new international organization designed to preserve peace, held its first meeting. Then came the news of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima on August 6 and Nagasaki on August 9. Japan surrendered on August 14. World War II was over.
During the 2-day holiday that followed, Americans celebrated the coming of peace. Few had any sense of what peace would mean. People wanted to get on with their lives, even if it was hard to imagine what the new “normal”
Demonstrate an understanding of the post-World War II world that emerged in the United States.
THE UNITED STATES IN
1945____________________ Describe the new technology, living patterns, and political arrangements in the United States that resulted from World War II.
THE COLD WAR BEGINS_______________________
Analyze the coming of the Cold War, tensions with the Soviet Union, and McCarthyism at home.
24.1
24.2
POLITICS, 1948 AND 1952______________________
Explain political developments that led to the elections of Truman and then Eisenhower as Cold War era presidents.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created 6&
■ Significant Dates
■—  .............—
1944	Bretton Woods Conference creates International Monetary Fund and World Bank
Dumbarton Oaks Conference
Great migration of African-Americans to the North expands
1945	Franklin D. Roosevelt dies and Harry S. Truman becomes president
Nazi Germany surrenders
UN charter approved and ratified
Truman meets with Stalin at Potsdam, Germany
First successful test of atomic bomb United States drops atomic bomb on Japan Japan surrenders
1946	George Kennan's "long telegram"
Winston Churchill's iron curtain speech U.S. baby boom begins
1947	Marshall Plan proposed Levittown, New York, housing opens
1948	United States recognizes new state of Israel Beginning of Berlin Airlift
Truman defeats Dewey, Wallace, and Thurmond in presidential election UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights
1949	Berlin Airlift ends
Senate ratifies U.S. membership in NATO Soviet Union tests atomic bomb Chiang Kai-shek leaves mainland China
1950	Alger Hiss convicted of lying under oath
Joseph McCarthy speech in Wheeling,
West Virginia
North Korea invades South Korea
U.S. landing at Inchon, Korea
Chinese forces drive UN force south of the 38th parallel
1952 Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for president
might look like. A Navy petty officer and his wife, walking hand in hand through the celebrations in Seattle on August 14, told a reporter their plans: Raise babies and keep house!” Many returning from the war followed these plans, but they did so in a world much more complex than could be imagined on that idyllic August evening. This chapter traces the experience of those Americans who built a new world in the after-math of World War II, describing not only their hopes and fears but also their surprises and disappointments as the postwar world took shape between 1945 and 1952.
THE UNITED STATES IN
1945 24.1
Describe the new technology, living patterns, and political arrangements in the United States that resulted from World War II.
Those who had been fighting in Europe or Asia wanted to get home as fast as they could, certainly faster than was possible given difficulties in transporting troops and managing Germany and Japan. For some women working in wartime production, it was time to welcome a long-absent husband or boyfriend, quit work, and raise a family. Other women very much wanted to continue working. For some who had moved because of the war, it was time to go home. Others who had moved wanted to stay in their new locations and have families join them. For industrial leaders, peacetime conversion meant new profits that would come from fulfilling pent-up demands for goods that had been unavailable during the war and from harnessing new discoveries related to medicines and emerging technologies. For government leaders, negotiating the international arrangements and managing the uneasy postwar alliances, especially with the United Soviet Socialist Republic (U.S.S.R.), commonly called the Soviet Union, made the postwar era one of the most difficult ever.
Science, Medicine, Technology, and the Bomb
If the nuclear physicists who designed and built the atomic bomb were in the vanguard of wartime scientific breakthroughs, biologists and medical researchers were not far behind. During World War II, the wonder drugs—penicillin and streptomycin-combated infections and resulted in a dramatic reduction in battlefield deaths. Soon after the war, medical scientists and pharmaceutical companies marketed other new antibiotics. The National Institutes of Health, which had begun as a tiny government agency in the 1930s, now led the nations war on disease.
By 1956, 80 percent of prescribed drugs had been invented after the beginning of World War II. Vaccines ended traditional childhood diseases such as whooping cough, diphtheria, mumps, and measles. In 1955, a vaccine was found for the feared scourge of polio. For those having a hard time keeping pace with modern life, physicians offered tranquilizers, sales of which boomed. People were growing taller and living longer thanks to advances in medicine, nutrition, and hygiene. In 1940, the average American’s lifespan was 62.9 years, but by 1960 it had reached 69.7. Science, it seemed, was offering the key to life itself.
For consumers, science and technology offered tangible improvements that changed daily life. In 1945, consumers were being introduced to freezers, dishwashers, automatic transmissions, and ballpoint pens. In offices, workers were beginning to use electric typewriters. Other technologies that had been developed prior to World War II —from washing machines to electric ranges to electric trains—were suddenly available after wartime production restrictions were lifted. Pent-up consumer demand and industrial availability combined quickly. What had been impossible to find during the war was now in every store.
No automobiles for private use had been produced in the United States between 1942 and 1945. But by 1947, new models were replacing the old vehicles from the 1930s. Sales of passenger cars jumped to 6.7 million per year in 1950 and to 7.9 million
686 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
in 1955. General Motors, which then sold about half of all cars in America, became the first corporation to earn $1 billion in a single year. Advertising by General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler convinced people to trade in 4.5 million old cars per year in the 1950s for large, sleek new models with automatic transmissions, air conditioning, and picturesque tail fins. By 1960, 80 percent of all American families owned a car, and 15 percent owned two or more cars.
While most households had radios in 1945, only a very few had televisions (black and white, of course). Television was developed by a number of inventors, notably Philo T. Farnsworth in the early 1930s, and was introduced at the 1939 New York World’s Fair. But television production stopped during World War II while factories made radar equipment. The number of television sets in American homes exploded after the war. In 1946, 8,000 homes owned a set; by 1950, 5 million; and by 1960,45 million—or 90 percent of all American homes. In 1945, half of the nation’s farm homes, where 25 million people lived, still did not have electricity to plug in a TV, but that too would change very quickly.
Hanging over all of the advances, however, was the atomic bomb. As Americans learned more about the bomb, they realized that it could end all of their improved health and new-found prosperity. Few Americans had questioned the morality of using the atomic bomb in 1945; indeed, only a tiny handful even knew that the weapon existed before its use. The few physicists who had developed the bomb understood what it meant, however. Very soon, many more came to understand the sobering reality of “the mushroom cloud” that a nuclear explosion unleashed. “The bomb” might be a new form of protection, since only the United States had it, but it was also a new threat (see Chapter 23).
Some scientists proposed the voluntary sharing of atomic technology to avoid an arms race, but President Truman decided that the safest course was for the United States to retain sole knowledge of nuclear secrets. However, in 1949, to the great surprise of many, the Soviet Union successfully tested its own atomic bomb. By that time, the wartime ally had become a potential enemy. Suddenly, with the Russian test, the idea that the United States was protected by its unique control of the bomb vanished. Before long, other nations joined the “atomic club.” Great Britain, the closest U.S. ally, exploded its own bomb in 1952, France followed in 1960, and others were not far behind. Above all other concerns, however, the fear of the Russian bomb is what hung over Americans.
Officials and scientists within the Truman administration debated the development of an even more powerful weapon to counter the Russian bomb. The atomic bomb depended on nuclear fission (the splitting of an atom), but scientists knew that theoretically an even more powerful explosion could arise from nuclear fusion (the merging of atoms) to create a thermonuclear explosion—a hydrogen bomb. While virtually no one involved opposed the development of the atomic bomb during World War II, many senior scientists opposed the “super bomb. Albert Einstein, whose scientific work formed the basis for nuclear science, said that with such a super bomb, “general annihilation beckons.” J. Robert Oppenheimer, who led the development of the first atomic bomb at Los Alamos, New Mexico, in 1944, opposed the larger bomb on moral and practical grounds. George Kennan, the state department official often most associated with the coming of the Cold War, argued that an arsenal of atom bombs was ample deterrent for the Soviets. Others disagreed. When President Truman asked his advisory panel, “Can the Russians do it? even those who opposed development of the hydrogen bomb had to answer yes. The president responded, In that case, we have no choice. We’ll go ahead.
The science and the engineering involved were daunting. When many of those who had built the first atomic bombs declined to participate in the new project, a fresh team, led by Hungarian refugees Edward Teller and John von Neumann, moved ahead. The first U.S. test of a thermonuclear bomb took place on November 1, 1952, at Eniwetok Atoll in the Pacific. The predictions about the Russian capabilities also became true: the first Russian bomb was exploded in Siberia in August 1953, little more than 9 months after the first U.S. test.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created
24.1
243
243
The bombs that the United States and Russia exploded were powerful beyond imagination. The United States’ test sent a fireball 5 miles into the sky and produced a mushroom cloud Y1 miles high and 8 miles wide. Eniwetok Island disappeared, replaced by a large hole in the ocean floor. The Soviet bomb was similar. Soviet Premier Georgi Malenkov told the world that “the United States no longer has a monopoly on the hydrogen bomb.” The possibility of mutually assured destruction,” influenced international diplomacy and daily life. Children practiced hiding under school desks in case of nuclear attack, (though critics wondered what good that would do in the face of a bomb that could vaporize a city.) Families built bomb shelters in their basements. The bomb was as much a part of daily life in the 1950s as televisions, new automobiles, or healthier lives.
Gl Bill of Rights
Legislation in June 1944 that eased the return of veterans into American society by providing educational and employment benefits.
baby boomers
The name given to the generation of children born to the families of returning World War II veterans between 1945 and 1960.
Returning Veterans, the Baby Boom, and Suburban Homes
In August 1945, as World War II ended, 12 million American men were in the military, two-thirds of those between the ages of 18 and 34. They had been through a brutal war, and now they wanted get home and get on with their lives. Those waiting at home were equally anxious to get the troops back. It took time to organize the military governance of Germany and Japan and to arrange the transport of troops. By fall, members of Congress started to get warning letters, “No boats, no votes.” Demobilization moved at a rapid pace. In less than a year, three-quarters of those in the military had been mustered out, leaving an active military of 3 million. Congress voted to cut that number to 1 million in another year.
Coming home from the war was joyous but also difficult. Soldiers and sailors, desperately tired of the killing, the dying, and the boredom of war, sometimes had a hard time adjusting to a world where life had gone on without them and in which civilians could never comprehend the horrors they had experienced. Married couples who had been apart, sometimes for 3 or 4 years, especially those who had married just before a husband shipped out, found adjustments difficult. The divorce rate skyrocketed in the late 1940s.
The government offered generous benefits to returning service men (and the few service women) to help with the adjustment. The GI Bill of Rights provided $20 per week for up to a year for those seeking new jobs. (The maximum payment of $1,040 for a full year was very close to the average American salary of $1,074 in 1945.) The GI Bill also offered college tuition for returning veterans, allowing a whole generation of young men to be the first in their families to attend college and prepare for middle-class occupations. In addition, the Veterans Administration made loans available for veterans to buy a house. Only later would some note that since the draft often passed over African-Americans and Latinos and excluded women, the GI Bill constituted a kind of affirmative action for white men. But in 1945, most Americans thought that these men had richly earned any favors they got.
Perhaps the greatest goal of returning veterans and the spouses and fiancees who met them was stated by the couple who wanted to “Raise babies and keep house!” They did both with amazing speed. Many veterans married very quickly, and the new couples started to have babies. In May 1946, 9 months after the end of the war, 233,452 babies were born in the United States, up from 206,387 earlier that February. In June, the number of babies was 242,302, and in October, 339,499. A total of 3.4 million babies were born in the United States in 1946, 20 percent more than were born in 1945, a birthrate unmatched in the United States in decades, though it kept climbing after that.
The speed with which returning veterans chose to marry and have children came as quite a surprise. Nothing similar had followed other wars, certainly not World War I, even though “normalcy” had been a theme of the 1920s. Nevertheless, Americans across the spectrum of class and race started having children. The population soared, and a generation known as the baby boomers” became a demographic bulge whose sheer size affected many aspects of American life throughout boomer lifespans.
688 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
For white middle-class Americans, a new home located in a suburban neighborhood offered the chance to build a safe and modern life. It was to these new homes, cut off from daily interchange with their extended families but connected to others very much like themselves, that a generation of Americans moved after 1945.
Just as these new families were getting started, Abraham Levitt andhis sons William and Alfred bought 4,000 acres of potato farms in the town of Hempstead, Long Island, outside of New York City. On this huge parcel of land, the Levitts built Levittown, the largest private housing project in American history. Their plan was simple: clear the land, lay out curving roads or lanes (never streets), pour concrete slabs every 60 feet along these roadways, drop off a set of construction materials at each slab— composition rock-board and plywood—then send in construction crews armed with new power tools—saws, routers, and nailers—each of whom was assigned a specific step in the construction process. At the peak of production, 30 houses were built each day. Each had a 12- by 16-foot living room, one bathroom, two bedrooms, and a fireplace. Levittown eventually included 17,400 houses that were home to 82,000 people.
Occupants moved into the first houses in Levittown in October 1947. At first, houses were sold only to veterans but soon were sold also to other families. Modest down payments and Veterans Administration and Federal Housing Authority loans brought the price of $7,990 to $9,500 within the range of many middle-class and aspiring middle-class families. Long Island’s Levittown was so successful that the Levitts built two more planned communities near Philadelphia. Other developers—Del Webb in Phoenix, Joseph Kelly in Boston, Louis H. Boyar and Fritz B. Burns in Los Angeles—created similar developments that sold at an astounding pace. Between 1945 and 1960, 10 times as many houses were constructed in suburbs as in older central cities, and 95 percent of these houses were detached single family homes. Mass production that had come to automobiles in the earliest 1900s came to housing after 1945.
Architectural and social critics disliked suburban developments. The nation’s best known critic, Lewis Mumford, described suburbs as,
With the end of World War II, many Americans embraced a new image of domestic bliss in a suburban home filled with children.
a multitude of uniform, unidentifiable houses, lined up inflexibly, at uniform distances, on uniform roads, in a treeless communal waste, inhabited by people of the same class, the same income, the same age group, witnessing the same television performances, eating the same tasteless pre-fabricated foods, from the same freezers, confirming in every outward and inward respect to a common mold.
For veterans and their families and those who followed after them in the 1950s, however, the new suburbs were a dream come true. Immediately after the war, a desperate housing shortage led many to double up with parents or other relatives. Half a million veterans lived in army Quonset huts or other temporary buildings. Chicago sold 250 old trolley cars as temporary homes. A home of one’s own, previously often a reality only for the upper-middle class and the rich, now became a new norm. The first issue of the community newspaper in Levittown noted that “our lives are held closely together because most of us are within the same age bracket, in similar income groups, live in almost identical houses, and have common problems.” The residents also made their own contribution to the baby boom to such a degree that the community became known as Fertility Valley and the Rabbit Hutch.”
A house in a subdivision like Levittown, New York, was a key part of the American dream for many in the 1940s and 1950s.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created 6
242
242
POPULATION SHIFT
LOUISIANA
(13.5%)
FLORIDA
(46.1%)
Decrease
|	| Over 20% increase
□ 5%-20% increase KH Under 5% increase
MAP 24-1 Americans on the Move. Many Americans moved around a lot during and after World War II, and many settled in communities distant from where they had been children. While African-Americans moved from the South to the North in large numbers, accounting for much of the population growth in states like New York and Illinois, white Americans moved from East to West, especially to California, which grew by 53 percent between 1940 and 1950.
As many in the postwar generation moved to suburbia, Americans also moved from the East to the West. Between 1940 and 1950—the years of the war and the immediate postwar era—the Sunbelt grew rapidly. Texas grew by 20 percent, Nevada by 45 percent, and Arizona and California by over 50 percent (see Map 24-1). Soldiers and sailors coming through California on the way to the Pacific liked what they saw and vowed to return. However, not all young Americans could or wanted to participate in the rush either to the suburbs or to the West. African-Americans, Latinos, and Asians were excluded from most suburban developments. Levittown specifically excluded people of color from its subdivisions for the first 20 years of the community’s existence. William Levitt believed that if blacks were allowed to move in to Levittown, the whites would leave. He commented, “We can solve a housing problem, or we can try to solve a racial problem. But we cannot combine the two.” As late as 1960, not a single African-American lived among the 82,000 residents of Levittown, New York.
All-white developments like Levittown were not unique. Post-World War II suburbanization was a white affair that greatly exacerbated housing segregation in the United States. Urban communities had long been segregated. Most cities had their Irish, Italian, and Jewish neighborhoods as well as neighborhoods for African-Americans, and in the Southwest, for Latinos. However, the move to the suburbs meant that many whites left the cities and many nonwhites were left behind in core urban communities with a declining tax base, declining services, and declining opportunities.
Suburbia, however, was not an attraction for all Americans. Gay men and lesbians of any race were generally excluded from suburbia unless they chose to live deeply closeted lives. One lesbian wrote, “It has never been easy to be a lesbian in this country, but the 1950s was surely the worst decade in which to love your own sex.” Others simply preferred to stay in older urban neighborhoods or small towns. Women who worked, especially those who remained single or were divorced, often found the conformity of suburbia difficult. For the poets and playwrights who became the “beat generation” of the 1950s who celebrated nonconformity, suburbia was unthinkable. There was
690 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
thinking historically
Observations on Levittown and Other Suburbs
24.1
In June, 1958, a sociologist, Herbert J. Gans, and his wife were among the first 25 families to move into the new Levittown development just outside Philadelphia. They lived there for the next 2 years as "participant observers" in this brand new planned suburban development. Unlike many others who wrote about suburbia, Gans noted more positive than negative observations.
About the ways that living in Levittown impacted community and social life, one resident whom Gans interviewed said:
We didn't know before we moved here that we would entertain more, go out less. Not that we were boozehounds before, though. Not that we can't afford to go out; we just don't want to. We have a new house and want to keep it up nice; this is not work but enjoyment. I've never been more content... .Working in the yard is just like fishing, so relaxing.
I have more pep here.
Even if outside critics did not like what they saw in suburbia, Gans found that most of those who actually lived in Levittown did like it.
One major exception to the general sense of happiness was found among adolescents. Gans interviewed one girl who complained, "After school hours, you walk into an entirely different world. Everyone goes his own separate way, to start his homework, take a nap, or watch TV. This is the life of a vegetable, not a human being." As a result of the isolation, a car became as
important to adolescents as it was to adults. One high school senior took a job to buy a car and told Gans, "I had no choice, it was either going to work or cracking up....I'll start living. I can get out of Levittown.... In plain words, a boy shouldn't live here if he is between the ages of 14-17."
While he expected to find more boredom and depression among the sometimes-isolated residents of Levittown, he did not. Gans worried about the impact of suburbanization on older cities that were losing middle-class residents and their tax base leaving behind people of color—who generally didn't or couldn't move to the suburbs—and those who were poor. But in the end, he concluded, "I should like to emphasize once more that whatever its imperfections, Levittown is a good place to live."
Source: Herbert J. Gans, The Levittowners: Ways of Life and Politics in a New Suburban Community (New York: Vintage Books, 1967)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Gans explain the dissatisfaction many adolescents felt with suburban living?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Why do you think Gans found so many suburban residents content with their new communities while most other social critics found them so negative?

virtually no way to get around most suburbs without a car, and for those who needed public transportation, cities remained essential. Nevertheless, starting in 1945, great numbers of American men and women moved to the suburbs and embraced life there.
The Great Migration—African-Americans Move North
While white Americans moved to the suburbs, a new generation of African-Americans moved from the South to the North. The great migration of African-Americans to the North began during World War I, continued through the 1920s, and slowed during the Depression years of the 1930s (see Chapter 21). During and after World War II, the rate of migration exploded. By 1960, half of the nations African-Americans lived in northern cities—a huge change from the time when more than 90 percent of all blacks lived in the rural South. While the pull of northern industrial jobs and the push of southern segregation and violence remained constant from the 1920s to the 1950s, another factor accelerated the pace of movement in the late 1940s; the sharecropping system, around which the economic lives of many southern blacks had been organized
from the 1880s to the 1940s, began to disappear.
On October 2,1944, as the tide of war was turning, a crowd gathered at the Hopson
cotton plantation outside of Clarksdale, Mississippi, on Highway 49 to look at a new machine that had nothing to do with the war. Howell Hopson was conducting the first
Chapter 24 The World the War Created
public demonstration of a new International Harvester cotton picking machine. He described the scene: “An estimated 2,500 to 3,000 people swarmed over the plantation on that one day, 800 to 1,000 automobiles leaving their tracks and scars throughout the property.”
The machine that the visitors had come to see changed the face of the South and changed the lives of the nation’s African-Americans. The bright red picker looked like a tractor with a large metal basket on the top. As it drove down a row of cotton, the spindles mounted on the front rotated and stripped the cotton off the plants and then suctioned the cotton up to a basket. The picker could pick a thousand pounds of cotton in an hour; a good worker, only 20 pounds. Hopson said it cost $5.26 for a machine to pick a bale of cotton. A sharecropper cost $39.41 per bale. He wrote, The introduction of the cotton harvester may have been comparable to the unveiling of Eli Whitney’s first hand-operated cotton gin.”
Hopson was thinking of the machine’s impact on his profits. But like Whitney’s invention a century and a half earlier, the machine’s largest impact was on men and women of African descent. Whitney’s cotton gin made slavery profitable. International Harvester’s cotton picking machine made the sharecropping that had replaced slavery obsolete. A wave of 1.5 million African-Americans had moved North between 1910 and 1940, but 5 million followed between 1940 and 1960.
As people whose lives were centered in the communities, churches, and culture of the rigidly segregated South moved North, they now lived in quite different communities with changing norms. Racial discrimination, generally seen as a southern issue until World War II, became a national one. Nevertheless, opportunities in the North were better than those offered by sharecropping, and the newcomers created their own jobs and a new urban culture.
Housing in the North was even more segregated than in the South. While the Federal Housing Authority dropped explicit racial rules by the 1940s, its handbook still said, “If a neighborhood is to retain stability, it is necessary that all properties shall continue to be occupied by the same social class.” In reality, that wording meant, “Don’t give mortgages to black families in white neighborhoods.” The white rush to segregated suburbs opened up new urban housing for blacks. Unscrupulous real estate agents made large profits while engaging in blockbusting in older neighborhoods, convincing frightened white homeowners to sell quickly and cheaply. From Boston to Los Angeles, whole city blocks went on the market at the same time, transferring the majority of homes from white to black hands in short order. Changes in the racial makeup of urban neighborhoods happened at the same time as cash-strapped cities cut back on municipal services and many banks dramatically reduced the availability of mortgages and loans for home improvements. The creation of the white suburbs and the vastly expanded urban black ghettos went hand in hand in the 1950s.
Moving from the South to an unfamiliar North could be painful for African-Americans. In The Last Train North, Clifton Taulbert described the longing for things left behind:
There were no Chinaberry trees. No pecan trees....Never again would I pick dew berries or hear the familiar laughter from the field truck. This was my world now, this strange new family and their cramped quarters over the tiny grocery store they grandly called the “confectionary.”
Nevertheless, they kept coming through the 1940s and 1950s. As a migrant from Tennessee to Milwaukee said, Every train, every bus, they were coming.”
Many who arrived were disillusioned. When Harvey Clark, who originally hailed from Mississippi, tried to move his family from a crowded apartment in South Chicago to a larger one just across the city line in Cicero, he was greeted by a mob and a police chief who told him to “Get out of Cicero.” The chief told the agent who arranged the apartment, “Don’t come back in town, or you’ll get a bullet through
692 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
you.” The white mayor of Dearborn, Michigan, told Alabama’s Montgomery Advertiser that “Negroes can’t get in here. Every time we hear of a Negro moving in, we respond quicker than you do to a fire. As Detroit became a majority black city, its suburb of Dearborn remained 99 percent white.
Black migrants also found new freedoms and opportunities in the North. Ida Mae Brandon Gladney, who had never been able to vote in Mississippi, cast her first vote for Franklin Roosevelt in Chicago in 1940. (The black vote in Chicago carried the state of Illinois and, thus, the Electoral College for Roosevelt in that election.) Robert Joseph Pershing Foster, a physician in Louisiana, established a new practice in the rapidly expanding black community of Los Angeles in 1954 and 1955. Ihe several million other people making the move from the states of the Old Confederacy to New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and a hundred other cities in the North and West each had his or her own tale of the transformations taking place in every region of the country.
Latino Migrations from Puerto Rico and Mexico
As they had in the 1920s, African-American artists embraced urban life and the new growing black communities of the North, few more enthusiastically than musicians like Charlie Parker and Miles Davis, shown here performing in New York City in 1947.
While the great migration of African-Americans from the rural South to the urban North and West was occurring, migrations of Latino people were happening at the same time. Ihe United States had won control of Puerto Rico in 1898, and Puerto Ricans had long been American citizens. After World War II, more of these Spanish-speaking citizens began moving from Puerto Rico to the U.S. mainland, especially New York City. East Harlem, long an Italian neighborhood in New York City, quickly became mostly Puerto Rican. Piri Thomas was born in New York in 1928 and described the racial discrimination faced by a young adult in Spanish Harlem in the 1950s in his 1967 memoir aptly named Down These Mean Streets.
In addition, the U.S. population included about 1.2 million Americans of Mexican background, and this group also grew rapidly after World War II. In the Southwest, the bracero (helping hands in Spanish) began during World War II to allow Mexican farm workers temporary entry into the United States to work in the agricultural fields that other Americans had left for war industries or for the military. The entry program was expanded after the war, and between 1948 and 1964, almost 5 million braceros were brought to the United States. Although they were expected to return to Mexico when the work was done, not all did, and they, along with others who walked across the hot deserts and the border, expanded the country’s Mexican-American population, creating a large group, some of whom remained under constant threat of deportation.
In Southern California, growth led to new militancy in the Mexican-American community. In Santa Ana, Mexican-American parents hired an attorney and sued the Board of Education over school segregation. In 1946, the courts issued a permanent injunction against this segregation, and later, the federal appeals court directed a federal grand jury to consider an indictment against the Santa Ana board.
In Los Angeles, with the largest Mexican-American population, the Community Service Organization began to fight for political rights in 1947 and was successful in electing Edward Roybal to the Los Angeles City Council in 1949, the first time since 1881 that someone of Mexican descent had served on that body. In 1962, Roybal was elected to the U.S. Congress. Other Mexican-American organizations sprang up across the southwest, supporting a successful mine workers strike in New Mexico in 1950-1952 and building a solid base before the civil rights movements of the later 1950s while also supporting a small but growing middle-class Latino community in California and Texas.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created
24.1
United Nations
An international organization launched at the end of World War II with leadership from the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and China.
The United Nations and the New Economic Order
While Americans were moving around the country, the rest of the planet was also in transition. Even before World War II ended, a series of international gatherings reshaped the political and economic climate of the coming postwar world.
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND THE WORLD BANK
In 1944, leaders in the United States and Britain were determined not to repeat the mistakes of the Treaty of Versailles. Among those mistakes, they believed, were the huge reparations imposed on the defeated Germany and the failure of the victors to ensure robust economic activity after the war. In early 1944, Roosevelt’s Secretary of the Treasury Henry M. Morgenthau invited Great Britain and the Soviet Union to join the United States in establishing a postwar economic system. Both agreed. Morgenthau then invited representatives of more than 40 wartime allies to meet at the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in July 1944.
The resulting Bretton Woods agreement created an International Monetary Fund (IMF) for “promoting international monetary cooperation.” The purpose of the IMF was to maintain exchange rates between different currencies so people could buy and sell in different countries without fear that values would fluctuate wildly (as happened in the 1930s), to provide loans to a nation that was having problems balancing payments, and to provide technical assistance to banks. The U.S. dollar was made the base on which all other currencies were calculated (and it remained so until 1971).
The Bretton Woods delegates also created the International Bank for Reconstruction Development (better known as the World Bank) to get the world on stable economic footing as quickly as possible after the devastation of the war. The World Bank was designed to support economic recovery in war-torn Europe and to reduce world poverty, especially in Latin America, Africa, and parts of Asia that did not have the economic foundation for recovery. The first loans from the World Bank were made to war-torn France in 1947, and loans were soon extended around the world.
THE UNITED NATIONS
When Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill agreed to an Atlantic Charter in August 1941, they called for the “establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security” (see Chapter 23). By 1944, however, Roosevelt was ready to get more specific. He proposed an international body that would include every nation but in which the most powerful ones—in his proposal, the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union, and China—would serve as the “Four Policemen.” As he told reporters in the summer of 1944, if some aggressor “started to run amok,” these policemen would be needed to “stop them before they got started.” By 1944, the wartime alliance was calling itself the United Nations, and Roosevelt wanted to keep the name. The United States invited representatives from “the four policemen” to meet at a mansion known as Dumbarton Oaks in Washington, DC. In 7 weeks, from August to October 1944, Edward R. Stettinius, U.S. undersecretary of state; Andrey Gromyko, Soviet ambassador to the United States; and Sir Alexander Cadogan, permanent undersecretary in the British Foreign Office, consulting with V.K. Wellington Koo, the Chinese ambassador to London—with whom Gromyko refused to meet directly-erected the basic structure of what would become the United Nations (UN).They agreed that the core of the new organization would be a Security Council made up of five permanent members (France was added as a fifth member) and other delegates serving on a rotating basis. The Security Council would have the real power within the UN. A majority vote of the Security Council would be sufficient to authorize military force to stop aggression. Everyone also agreed that each of the core members of the Security Council should have a veto over any such actions; the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union were not about to allow sanctions of which they did not approve.
The planners also proposed a UN General Assembly that would permit all of the nations of the world to debate issues but that, unlike the Security Council, could not
$94 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
American Voices
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
24.1
24.2
Three years after the United Nations was created, a UN Commission on Human Rights, chaired by former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, proposed a Universal Declaration of Human Rights. By 1948, the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union was fully underway, and many UN meetings were little more than shouting matches. Few expected any productive results. But Eleanor Roosevelt was able to calm the waters enough to get the document approved. The final vote was 48 in favor, zero opposed, and 8 abstentions, including the Soviet Union. Roosevelt considered the adoption of the declaration to be her most important accomplishment. While the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had no enforcement mechanism, it set a new standard of international behavior against which every nation could be measured.
PREAMBLE
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people, Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law, Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge,
Now, Therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY proclaims THIS UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations...
The document then includes a total of 30 articles that elaborate the points in detail.
Source: www.un.org/en/documents/index.shtml, downloaded May 19,2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How might the events of World War II have shaped this document?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What might explain the decision of the Soviet Union to abstain from voting on the Declaration?
243
■HI
enforce its resolutions. In addition, they agreed that there should be a secretary with a staff. Finally, they agreed that the new body should convene for the first time the following spring in San Francisco, California.
Roosevelt, mindful of Woodrow Wilson’s failure to take Republicans to Versailles, appointed a bipartisan delegation to go to San Francisco, including Republican Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan, one of the most respected members of the Senate. Vandenberg’s support would be crucial, and Roosevelt knew it.
Two weeks before the San Francisco meeting was to begin, Franklin D. Roosevelt died. Moments after taking the oath of office, Harry S. Truman made his first presidential decision: the conference would go ahead as scheduled on April 25. Some thought the San Francisco conference would simply be a celebration of work already done, but new tensions, especially between the United States and the Soviet Union, almost scuttled the conference. Nevertheless, most Americans wanted the United Nations to be successful, and public opinion influenced the delegates, especially Vandenberg. On June 25, 1945, the delegates unanimously approved the UN Charter. On July 28, the U.S. Senate ratified the charter by a vote of 89 to 2. The United Nations was launched.
Quick Review What were the most radical postwar changes domestically and internationally? Give three reasons to support each of your choices.
Chapter 24 The World the War Creates
24.1
24.2
243
Cold War
The political and economic confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States that dominated world affairs from 1946 to 1989.
THE COLD WAR BEGINS
Analyze the coming of the Cold War, tensions with the Soviet Union, and McCarthyism at home.
In 1945, most people in the United States admired the Soviet Union, even if American leaders had already become wary of Stalin and his government. After meeting Stalin for the first time at Tehran in late 1943, Roosevelt said, “I got along fine with Marshall Stalin.” Privately, however, he confided his doubts.
The two nations were allies in World War II. American wartime propaganda talked positively about “our valiant allies.” The Soviet people had withstood a murderous onslaught by Nazi forces and a terrible siege at Stalingrad. The Soviet army had done most of the fighting against Nazi Germany in World War II. Few Americans knew much about Stalin’s policies within Russia, including the deadly purges of political enemies or the mass starvation that resulted from efforts toward collectivist Russian agriculture in the 1930s. Yet within a year, the Soviet Union and the United States were engaged in a Cold War that lasted 40 years, until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the late 1980s. What happened to turn former allies against each other? And why did it happen so quickly?
The Hardening of Positions: Containment, the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and the Berlin Airlift
From the beginning of their wartime alliance, the United States and the Soviet Union had very different goals in World War II. The Soviets wanted a permanent buffer zone between themselves and Germany, and they wanted to ensure that they obtained absolute control over the countries of Eastern Europe. Having suffered so much from the war, the Soviets were also determined to take all of the machinery, munitions, and art they could from Germany. The United States wanted a rapid
24.2
This picture of American and Soviet soldiers in Germany in May 1945, just after the Nazi surrender, illustrates the friendship between the people of the two nations that developed during World War II and that ended very soon after that.
>96 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
post-Nazi German recovery. In 1942, Roosevelt told Soviet Foreign Minister V. M. Molotov that, there might be a proper time” to address the differences in war goals between the two nations, but in the midst of the war, FDR said, "the present was not the moment.”
Within weeks of taking the oath of office, President Truman became convinced that the Soviets were violating promises they had made to Roosevelt and needed to be stopped. When he met with Foreign Minister Molotov for the first time, he was ready to show how tough an American president could be. When Molotov began the conversation with diplomatic chit chat, Truman immediately accused the Soviets of breaking promises they had made to FDR at the Yalta meeting. As Truman continued his tirade, Molotov responded, "I have never been talked to like that in my life,” to which Truman responded, ‘Carry out your agreements and you won’t get talked to like that. It was not an auspicious start to a new relationship. Truman later told friends, I gave him the one-two, right to the jaw.” Molotov and Stalin quickly concluded that Truman was reversing Roosevelt’s policies, especially when Truman cut aid to the Soviet Union, claiming that, with the war in Europe over, they no longer needed it. But Stalin did not back down. Indeed, almost immediately after the Truman-Molotov meeting, Stalin asserted Communist control over the new governments of Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria.
In spite of Truman’s tough tone with Molotov in April 1945, Truman knew that he had a weak hand in dealing with the Soviets. He sent one of Roosevelt’s most trusted advisors to Moscow to try to build a better relationship, and then in July for the first— and only—time, he met face to face with Stalin in Potsdam, just outside the newly conquered Berlin. Truman and Stalin seemed to get on, and after the Potsdam meeting, Truman wrote, "I can deal with Stalin.” The Americans agreed that Stalin had the right to dismantle factories in eastern Germany and move them to Russia and could arrange the government of Poland as he chose.
There were many reasons for these concessions. Most important, when the fighting in Europe ended, the Soviet army was in Eastern Europe and the American army was not. Truman knew that the American people had no stomach for maintaining an army in Europe after the war. Until the last day of the Potsdam meeting, Truman was not sure that the atomic bomb would work. Finally, with war still raging in the Pacific, Truman wanted the Soviets to keep their promise to attack Japan once the war in Europe was over.
In the year that followed the end of the war, however, both sides hardened their positions. In February and March 1946, new tensions flared. In a speech on February 9, Stalin said that the only key to future world peace was for “monopoly capitalism” to be replaced by Communism around the world. Supreme Court Justice William Douglas called Stalin’s speech a Declaration of World War III.”
A week later, George Kennan, a senior diplomat in the American embassy in Moscow, sent what came to be known as the “Long Telegram to the U.S. State Department. This widely distributed document called the Soviet government an “Oriental despotism” in which Communist ideology was merely a “fig-leaf’ covering tyranny at home and rapid expansion abroad. Kennan told his State Department superiors that the Soviet Union was a political force committed fanatically to the belief that with the United States there can be no permanent modus vivendi [accommodation between disputing parties], that it is desirable and necessary that the internal harmony of our society be destroyed, the international authority of our state be broken.” He suggested that the United States should adopt a policy of containment, acknowledging Soviet influence where it existed but taking all necessary steps to ensure that the influence did not spread into new areas of the globe. Containment of Soviet communism would come to define U.S. foreign policy for a long time.

243
containment
The policy of resisting further expansion of the Soviet bloc through diplomacy and, if necessary, military action, developed in 1947-48.
Chapter 24 The World the War Creati
24.1
24.2
243
iron curtain
A phrase coined by former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill in 1946 when describing the post-World War II division of Europe into two hostile segments.
Truman Doctrine
President Harry Truman's statement in 1947 that the United States should assist other nations that were facing external pressure or internal revolution.
Two weeks later, Winston Churchill, no longer in office but still a revered war hero, gave a speech as Truman’s guest at Westminster College in Missouri in which he said:
From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the continent. From what I have seen of our Russian friends and allies during the war, I am convinced that there is nothing they admire so much as strength, and there is nothing for which they have less respect than weakness, especially military weakness.
The image of an “iron curtain” dividing Europe became one of the central images of the Cold War. The call for military strength to counter Soviet strength became the foundation of a massive arms race on both sides of the iron curtain.
Not everyone in the United States agreed that a Cold War with the Soviet Union was inevitable. Three senators issued a statement saying, “Mr. Churchill’s proposal would cut the throat of the Big Three, without which the war could not have been won and without which the peace cannot be saved.” Former Vice President Henry Wallace, by then secretary of commerce, insisted that it was important for the United States to “allay any reasonable Russian grounds for fear, suspicion, and distrust.” Privately, Truman called these critics of Churchill’s speech “the American Crackpots Association.”
As 1946 came to an end, more Americans were coming to the conclusion that Stalin was an evil dictator and the Soviet Union could not be trusted. Truman decided that his administration needed to speak with a single voice and dropped Wallace and Secretary of State James Byrnes from the cabinet, replacing the latter with George Marshall, who was U.S. chief of staff during the war. A year later, Truman also sponsored a reorganization of the nation’s military forces in which the previously separate cabinet-level War and Navy departments were merged into a single Department of Defense that was responsible for all military matters. Truman was quickly concluding that the end of World War II did not mean the end of the need for U.S. military strength.
Meanwhile, in early 1947, Greece was in the midst of a civil war between its government and communist forces, and Turkey was resisting Soviet demands for greater control of access to the eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East. Great Britain, which had been providing support for both governments, said it could no longer afford to do so. Truman, Marshall, and Marshall’s deputy, Dean Acheson, agreed that the United States needed to step in to take Britain’s place in supporting resistance to communism in the region. If the containment policy meant anything, it certainly meant stopping Soviet moves into places like Greece and Turkey. The Truman Doctrine made it clear that containing communism would be at the bedrock of U.S. foreign policy. Needing the support of a reluctant Congress, Truman appeared in person and said, “I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.”
In June, the administration announced plans for massive economic aid to western Europe. The winter of 1946-47 had been the worst in years. By spring, Europe was running dangerously low on coal and food. People were cold, hungry, and desperate. Secretary of State Marshall used a Harvard commencement speech to tell the world:
Marshall Plan
The European Recovery Program (1949), which provided U.S. economic assistance to European nations in large part to keep them out of the Soviet Union's sphere of influence.
Our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos....We know that in this trying period, between a war that is over and a peace that is not yet secure, the destitute and oppressed of the earth look chiefly to us for sustenance and support until they can again face life with self-confidence and self-reliance.
The speech was partly true. The humanitarian goals, a campaign against hunger, poverty and desperation, were real. But the Marshall Plan, as it came to be called, was also directed against one country and its doctrine. People in the United States and the Soviet Union knew that the goal was to stop Soviet expansion in Western Europe.
698 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
Congress funded $13.34 billion in U.S. aid for Europe between 1948 and 1952. People were fed, economies recovered, and western capitalist democracies were established.
Stalin saw the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan as a direct assault. Some Americans, notably the now-out-of-office Henry Wallace, also thought it was a needless provocation. The Soviets quickly solidified the power of a pro-Soviet regime in Hungary and arranged a pro-Soviet coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948. Then in June 1948, the Soviet Union closed off American, British, and French access to Berlin. Before World War II ended, the Soviet Union, Britain, the United States, and France had agreed that each of them would assume military authority not only in a different quadrant of Germany but also within a different quadrant in the city of Berlin, even though Berlin itself was deep inside the Soviet quadrant. The result was a divided Germany and a divided Berlin, a precarious situation especially for the former capital city (see Map 24-2).
The Soviets saw Berlin as a useful pressure point in the Cold War. By closing off western access to the city, they could challenge the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan. When they blocked all rail and highway access to Berlin in the spring of 1948, Truman decided to support the city with an airlift. In the days and weeks that followed, the Berlin Airlift sent hundreds of U.S. airplanes every day to Templehoff Airport in the western sector of Berlin. The city was well supplied and West Berlin withstood the siege. Eventually in May 1949, the Soviet Union relented and reestablished access to Berlin. Nevertheless, by the beginning of 1949, the iron curtain that Churchill had described was more firmly in place than ever, and the Cold War, which had been developing since 1945, was a reality.
24.2
Berlin Airlift
In 1948 and 1949, food and supplies delivered by air into Berlin to keep the city attached to western Europe.
1949—The Soviet Atom Bomb and the Fall of China
Just as the crisis in Berlin was coming to an end, the U.S. Senate ratified American membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), by an 82 to 13 vote in July 1949. Fearing a Soviet invasion of western Europe, 12 nations, led by the United States and Britain, created the NATO alliance, in which each member agreed to treat an attack on any one from any source—though only one source was feared—as an attack on all. There would be no repeat by any country of Nazi Germany’s attacks on the nations of Europe, one after another. The NATO treaty was the first time in history that the United States agreed to such a peacetime partnership.
Virtually nonstop flights brought vital supplies to the city of Berlin and sustained it during its isolation from June 1948 until May 1949.
Chapter 24 The World the War Ci
i “h
MAP 24-2 A Divided Germany. With the end of World War II, American, British, French, and Soviet forces each controlled a portion of Germany and a portion of the German capital city of Berlin as well as temporarily Austria. The arrangement would soon lead to a new crisis.
700 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
IB
Members of NATO (1949) M88
Members of Warsaw Pact (1955) Hi Nonaligned counties (D Participants in the Marshall Plan, 1947-1952 Year first atomic device was tested by that country
Map^s’a Wvided Europe. As the Cold War escalated, countries within NATO and those within the Warsaw Pact, with few neutral nations, made up the new Europe.
Chapter 24 The World the War O
:oi
In 1955, when the Federal Republic of Germany, or West Germany, was created out of the merged British, French, and U.S. occupation zones and admitted to NATO, the Soviet Union formed the Warsaw Pact—a military alliance in eastern Europe specifically designed to counter NATO with the same guarantees of mutual assistance for its members, all of whom were under tight control by the Soviet Union. NATO and the Warsaw Pact would be more powerful entities in the coming decades than the United Nations (see Map 24-3).
Two further events in the fall of 1949 sped the growth of Cold War sentiment in the United States. First, in August, the Russians exploded their own atomic bomb. Then, soon after the announcement of Soviet nuclear capacity, the government of the U.S. wartime ally Chiang Kai-shek was defeated by Chinese communists. The creation of the Communist People’s Republic of China under the leadership of Mao Tse-tung and the flight of Chiang’s government to the island of Taiwan was a huge blow to American pride even though the United States continued to recognize the Taiwan-based government as the official voice of China until the 1970s. Chiang s government had been an important symbol to Americans since the Japanese invasion of China in the 1930s, and the United States had spent almost $3 billion to help Chiang since the end of World War II. Americans had tended to ignore the corruption and inefficiency of Chiang’s Nationalist government. An internal U.S. State Department paper written in August 1949 just before the fall of Chiang’s government said, The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States.” However, many Americans— in Congress, in the media, and around the country—were convinced that the United States had somehow “lost China” and that the Truman administration was at fault. It was a sour time in a country which was not used to losses.
The Cold War at Home—Joseph McCarthy and a New Red Scare
As Americans tried to make sense of the Cold War, the Soviet manufacture of an atomic bomb, and the Communist takeover in China, some in Congress and beyond looked for internal enemies. Many politicians were worried about maintaining the security of the United States, but some in Congress sought political gain by fomenting a new Red Scare similar to the one that had followed World War I (see Chapter 21).
On January 21, 1950, Alger Hiss, a former State Department official who had been with FDR at Yalta and who helped organize the United Nations, was accused of having been a spy for the Soviets in the 1930s. One week later, Klaus Fuchs, an atomic scientist, was arrested in London and accused of turning over nuclear secrets to the Soviets. Fuchs implicated several Americans, including David Greenglass, Greenglass’s sister Ethel Rosenberg, and her husband Julius Rosenberg. And little more than a week after the arrest of Fuchs, Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy gave a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia, in which he claimed to have a list of active Communist Party members who worked for the federal government. People began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere. The nation was in for 5 years of fear and suspicion.
Reality was more complex than the picture of widespread subversion implied. Although the Communist Party in the United States was tiny, thousands of Americans had considered communism as an alternative to the nation’s battered economic system in the 1930s. In addition, during World War II, the Soviet Union was the America’s close ally in the fight against Nazi Germany. Before 1945, no one could have anticipated that helping the Soviets would be such a serious crime later in the decade.
Like many State Department officials, Alger Hiss was from the highest social strata, making him an ideal choice for those who wanted to whip up class resentment as well as anticommunism. When Hiss was accused of passing state secrets to the Soviets, he insisted on testifying under oath in front of Congress, a move that opened Hiss to a charge of libel, and even though he was never convicted of espionage, he was eventually convicted of lying under oath to Congress and served 3 years in prison. More recently available documents make it clear that Hiss had, indeed, probably been a communist in the 1930s, but when politicians like Republican Representative Karl Mundt of South Dakota said that the conviction proved that the United States “had been run by New Dealers, Fair Dealers, Misdealers and Hiss dealers” they were lumping an awful lot of other people who had never even flirted with communism in the same category. Mundt s comment did prove that, in many parts of the United States,
702 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
Senator Joseph McCarthy lectured widely on the Communist menace. Although he gave few details, he successfully created great fear. In this image, he exhibits a photograph that he claims is evidence of communist infiltration during a Senate investigation in 1954.
deep resentment of the New Deal and of the eastern elite was alive and well and could easily be linked with each other and both could be linked with fears of the growing international influence of communism in the late 1940s.
Greenglass and the Rosenbergs were investigated in 1950 and charged with being Soviet spies and with passing on atomic secrets to the Soviets in 1951. Greenglass worked at the top-secret Manhattan Project, and Julius Rosenberg was a wartime engineer, and both had access to highly secret data. They were also Jewish, and even though Americans were horrified by the Holocaust, anti-Semitism was alive and well in the United States in 1950. Just as Hiss suffered for his East Coast elite status,
Greenglass and the Rosenbergs suffered for their Jewish background. In the end, Greenglass served a long prison term. Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, who always maintained their innocence, were executed in 1953, the only Americans ever executed under the 1917 Espionage Act.
(In the 1990s, when Soviet archives were opened and when another one of the accused coconspirators, Morton Sobell admitted that he had, indeed, been a spy, it seemed
clear that at least Julius, if not Ethel, had been Soviet spies.) It was also clear that, in the atmosphere of 1950 and 1951, it was virtually impossible for them to get a fair trial.
Senator Joseph McCarthy was not the first elected official to try to make political gains by stirring up the fear of communism (in fact he came late to the process), but he stole the leadership from all the others. He had been searching for a new political issue on which to build his reelection campaign in Wisconsin, and in February 1950, he thought he had found it when he heard the national reaction to a speech in which he said, “I have here in my hand a list of 205—a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Community Party who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department.”
McCarthy was far more interested in his own fame than in actually finding communists. His Senate colleagues knew him as a pathological liar who had lied about his military service (he said he had flown 30 combat missions when he had flown none; his limp was not from shrapnel, as he claimed, but from a fall), and he embarrassed them. He drank heavily, fanned the flames of homophobia, and attacked both Republicans and Democrats whom he thought were “soft on communism.” Nevertheless, few were willing to challenge McCarthy while the country was caught up in the fear of communism.
McCarthy said, “The government is full of Communists.” He also said that Acheson’s predecessor, George Marshall, had “lost” China. For those who believed that only a conspiracy could have led to the growth of communist influence around the world, McCarthy was the perfect voice. In June 1951, he told one audience:
How can we account for our present situation unless we believe that men high in this government are concerting to deliver us to disaster? This must be the product of a conspiracy, a conspiracy on a scale so immense as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man.
Only treason in high places could account for the nation s troubles as McCarthy described them.
McCarthy never did name the names on his list, and the numbers kept shifting in different speeches, but he ruined careers and frightened many into silence. His pop-ularity seemed to protect him. In May 1950, a Gallup poll showed that 84 percent of Americans knew who McCarthy was and 39 percent believed that his attacks were
Chapter 24 The World the War Cre;
House Committee on Un-American Activities
Congressional committee (1938-1975) that investigated suspected Nazi and Communist sympathizers.
good for the country. Few political leaders were willing to challenge him. However, in June 1950, Maine’s Republican Senator Margaret Chase Smith and six colleagues issued a “Declaration of Conscience,” saying that McCarthy was using the Senate as a “publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism. Still, he continued for 4 more years.
When he became president in 1953, Eisenhower did not challenge McCarthy directly, but helped those who wanted to undermine him. In 1954, Edward R. Murrow, perhaps the most respected journalist in the country, did an expose on McCarthy on his “See It Now” program on CBS television. Both the Senate declaration and the CBS program hurt McCarthy’s reputation, but it was only when McCarthy decided to probe for communists in the U.S. Army that he met his match. As the army s attorney Joseph Welch grilled him, McCarthy lashed out at a young attorney who was assisting Welch, accusing him of being a Communist because he was a member of the left-leaning National Lawyers Guild. Welch exploded, “Until this moment Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness.” The hearing room burst into applause. After that, on December 2,1954, the Senate voted to condemn McCarthy by a vote of 67 to 22. He continued to serve out his term until his death in 1957, but he was a beaten man and no longer a force in national politics.
McCarthy was hardly the only leader of the Red Scare of the late 1940s and early 1950s. J. Edgar Hoover, who had been head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) since 1924 and a participant in the government’s attack on radicals after World War I, cultivated a reputation as the nation’s top crime fighter, especially after FBI agents killed John Dillinger, “Public Enemy Number One,” during Prohibition. But Hoover also cultivated a role as a leading anti-Communist, seeking to expose what he claimed was communist influence in the government, universities, religious groups, and later civil rights organizations. He collected files on hundreds of Americans, from members of Congress to union officials. Although President Truman complained about Hoover, insisting, “We want no Gestapo or Secret Police,” he did not stop Hoover’s search for subversives.
Other politicians realized that the search for Communists could lead to electoral success. The House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC) became a powerful forum for those who used the fear of communism to pursue other agendas. One of its members, John Rankin, a Democrat from Mississippi linked communism, Jews, and civil rights workers, saying of the Civil Rights Movement, “This is part of the communistic program, laid down by Stalin approximately 30 years ago. Remember communism is Yiddish. I understand that every member of the Politburo around Stalin is either Yiddish or married to one, and that includes Stalin himself.” A young Republican Representative from California, Richard M. Nixon, used HUAC to build a national reputation, investigating Hiss, looking for communists in the government, and extending the search into the entertainment industry and education.
While some in the entertainment world quickly cooperated with HUAC, many fought back. Judy Garland, one of the nation’s most popular stars since her childhood role in the Wizard of Oz, pleaded, “Before every free conscience in America is subpoenaed, please speak up!” Frank Sinatra asked, “Once they get the movies throttled .. .how long will it be before we’re told what we can say and cannot say into the radio microphone? If you make a pitch on a nationwide radio network for a square deal for the underdog, will they call you a Commie?.. .Are they going to scare us into silence?” Undeterred, HUAC continued with its hearings. Many witnesses refused to testify on the Fifth Amendment grounds that they could not be compelled to testify against themselves. Ten actors, known as the Hollywood Ten, took the more difficult route of claiming that the hearings threatened their First Amendment rights of free speech. The 10 and others were blacklisted and had their careers ruined, in spite of efforts by the Committee for the First Amendment led by Humphrey Bogart, Lauren Bacall, Katherine Hepburn, and Danny Kaye to protect them.
704 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
thinking historically
Looking at the Art of the Postwar Nation
f—
! 2<U i
j
24.2
In his book, the Unfinished City: New York and the Metropolitan idea, historian Thomas Bender wrote of the radical transformation of the arts after World War II, "Intellectual historians have failed to grasp the variety of artistic and critical work that characterized the 1940s, partly because concerns of the Cold War era gave precedence to certain ideological themes and political trends." Bender argues that it is also important to pay attention to the "remarkable creativity and critical discourse in the fields of painting and sculpture, photography, architecture, music, and dance."
As Bender observes, while many Americans were focused on the Cold War, others were using the arts to ask different questions about American life, especially as people came to terms with the threat of nuclear disaster after World War II. Often, artists were pointing to the confusions—some said pointlessness—of contemporary thinking as much or more than they were making overt statements about one political ideology or another.
James Agee, himself a very well-known author, was the film critic for the Nation magazine in the late 1940s. In a 1948 review, he wrote:
Several of the best people in Hollywood grew, noticeably, during their years away at war; the man who grew most impressively, I thought, as an artist, as a man, in intelligence, and in an ability to put through fine work against difficult odds, was [film director] John Huston... .His first movie since the war has been a long time coming, but it was certainly worth waiting for. The Treasure of the Sierra Mad re is... a bout as near to folk art as a highly conscious artist can get....I doubt we shall ever see a film more masculine in style; or a truer movie understanding of character and of men.
As a generation of young men returned from the fighting of the war and took up their day-to-day lives in the civilian workforce, some worried that perhaps they had left their masculinity
behind on the battlefields. Artists, like the film director John Huston, addressed these fears. While the films of the late 1940s and early 1950s were, like al, films, meant to entertain, they also helped some in the audience think through some of their greatest hopes and fears.
The abstract artist Jackson Pollock painted Convergence in 1952. Like most abstract art, the complex work leaves it to the beholder to make meaning of the lines and colors the artist offers.
Source: Thomas Bender, Unfinished City: New York and the Metropolitan Idea (New York: New York University Press, 2002), pp. 135-136; James Agee, "The Treasure of the Sierra Mad re," The Nation, January 31,1948.
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
In your opinion, what can a period's art tell us about its politics? What sort of political ideas might one see in an abstract painting or a film about masculinity?
2.	Constructing an Argument
How would you explain the emergence of abstract art in the era of the atomic bomb after World War II in place of the much more realistic paintings of the 1930s?
t	...
j
Many labor unions purged communist members. Aspiring new leaders used the accusation of communist influence to push aside older leaders. The United Electrical Workers union was replaced by a new union of electrical workers because the United Electrical was considered to be communist and was expelled by the American Federation of Labor. Civil Rights organizations, including the Urban League, the Congress of Racial Equality, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), purged communist members. Many school districts and 21 states required loyalty oaths from teachers. In 1948, the University of Washington fired three professors when they refused to answer questions about the Communist Party. Some 31 professors were ultimately fired from the University of California under similar circumstances. And the American Federation of Teachers, the leading union of elementary and secondary teachers, voted that communists should not be allowed to be members or teach in the nation’s schools.
Chapter 24 The World the War Crei
i
Not everyone was caught up in the Red Scare hysteria. Philip Murray, president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, one of the nation s largest unions, wrote to President Truman in 1947 to protest that government policy did not ensure due process for accused employees. Secretary of the Treasury John Snyder protested the government’s Loyalty Review Board in 1948.
George Kennan, who had played an important role in launching the Cold War, added a somber note in his Memoirs: “What the phenomenon of McCarthyism did... was to implant in my consciousness a lasting doubt as to the adequacy of our political system....I could never recapture after these experiences of the 1940s and 1950s, quite the same faith in the American system of government and in traditional American outlooks that I had, despite all the discouragements of official life, before that time. Not everyone shared Kennan’s pessimism, but many felt that American democracy itself had been wounded by the tactics of people like McCarthy.
War in Korea
On June 25, 1950, to the surprise of U.S. leaders, the army of North Korea attacked South Korea. Korea was a part of the world to which U.S. planners had paid very little attention. But it was the place where the Cold War turned very hot.
With the Japanese defeat in 1945, the victorious allies determined to honor Korean hopes for independence. U.S. military authorities used the same formula as they had for Germany: a divided military occupation that was meant to be temporary. Military planners agreed that the Soviet army would occupy Korea north of the 38th parallel (North Korea) and that U.S. forces would occupy the southern half of the peninsula, including the old capital of Seoul (South Korea), until a permanent plan for national unification could be achieved. It would be a long wait.
The United States backed a new government led by the 75-year-old Syngman Rhee, who was conservative, charming, fiercely independent, as well as corrupt and dictatorial. The Soviets backed an even more dictatorial 31-year-old communist, Kim Il-Sung. Both Rhee and Kim were committed to Korean unification, but on very different terms. Between the end of World War II and 1950, constant clashes between the two governments cost perhaps 100,000 Koreans their lives.
Then, in 1949 and 1950, a crisis developed. In 1949, the Soviet delegate to the United Nations, Jacob Malik, began boycotting the UN Security Council because that body continued to give the Nationalist Chinese government of Chiang Kai-shek the UN vote even though the Communist government ruled mainland China. Ihe protest meant that the Soviet Union could not veto Security Council resolutions at a crucial moment.
At the same time, the Truman administration, worried that the United States was spread too thin, and seeing Korea as of only marginal significance, withdrew the U.S. military, leaving Rhee’s government on its own. A year later in 1950, in a speech he later regretted, Secretary of State Dean Acheson described the U.S. “defensive perimeter” in Asia in a way that did not include either Korea or Taiwan. Stalin and the North Korean dictator Kim Il-Sung assumed that the United States was not prepared to defend South Korea. Kim pressed Stalin to approve an attack and Stalin agreed, though he warned Kim, “[I]f you get kicked in the teeth, I shall not lift a finger.” It was all the permission Kim needed. On June 25, 100,000 North Korean troops, supported by tanks, artillery, and planes, invaded the South.
The Communist leaders had misread U.S. intentions. Truman viewed the Korean invasion through the prism of British and French inaction in the face of Nazism. He was determined to maintain the Truman Doctrine of containment of communism anywhere in the world. With the Soviets absent, Acheson appealed to the United Nations Security Council and got a unanimous vote in favor of UN action to stop the North Koreans. The Korean War was called a UN police action, although nearly all of the fighting was done by U.S. and Korean troops.
706 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
Public opinion polls showed solid support for American action, and people as diverse as Republican Governor of New York Thomas Dewey and liberal Henry Wallace (both of whom had run against Truman in the 1948 presidential election) supported Truman. Congress appropriated $10 billion.
Truman ordered General Douglas MacArthur, then commander of U.S . troops occupying Japan, to take command in Korea, and troops were rushed to Korea. Meanwhile, the North Koreans kept coming. By September, 3 months after the war began, U.S. and South Korean forces controlled only a small section of southeast Korea around the port of Pusan, known as the Pusan perimeter. Slowly, however, the U.S. forces were built up and supplies brought into Korea. American planes bombed North Korean troops heavily. The bombing wreaked havoc on Communist supply lines but also destroyed rice fields. Perhaps half the invading North Korean army were killed or wounded in the first 2 months of the war, and most of the North Korean tanks were disabled. Two to three million Korean civilians, 10 percent of the prewar population of Korea, died during the war either from bombing or from starvation because of lost rice crops.
In September 1950, under MacArthur’s command, the U.S. and UN forces made a surprise amphibious landing at Inchon, on the west coast of Korea close to the 38th parallel. The Communist forces were cut off from their supplies and captured or forced to retreat. The tide of war suddenly turned, and in less than a month, the Americans advanced from the small perimeter to retake South Korea (see Map 24-4).
For MacArthur, the initial victory was only the beginning. He insisted, and Truman agreed, that the moment had come to unify the whole Korean peninsula under Syngman Rhee. The UN, with the Soviets still boycotting, agreed and MacArthur’s forces began moving north, closer to the Chinese border at the Yalu River. MacArthur was confident that he could win the war and be home by December. When Truman asked about the chance of a Chinese intervention, Mac Arthur responded, “Very little.” He was wrong.
By late November, as MacArthur’s army continued north, a huge Chinese army attacked them. “The Chjnese have come in with both feet,” Truman said. This time it was the Americans that had long drawn-out supply lines. They
were ill prepared for the freezing cold of a Korean winter. The Chinese wore warm, padded clothing, had fought for years in similar territory, and were adept at terrifying hand-to-hand night fighting when American planes and troops could not see them. The fighting in November and December of 1950 was brutal. Soldiers were killed as they slept or froze in the winter cold. The retreats were frightful. The U.S. Army Seventh Infantry Division lost 5,000 troops, one-third of its force, in a 3-day retreat over mountainous roads as the Chinese attacked from every angle. By January 1951, the line dividing the two armies was well south of the 38th parallel. The war settled into a bloody stalemate.
For Truman, the defeats in Korea at the end of 1950 were a diplomatic and a political disaster. Republicans now saw him as weak. Some urged the use of atomic weapons on China. General MacArthur, whom Truman despised, had strong Republican support. (MacArthur’s fellow senior officers had their own opinions. When General Eisenhower was asked if he had met MacArthur he responded, “Not only have I met him... .1 studied dramatics under him.”) In early 1951, MacArthur bypassed Truman and tried to get congressional support for a wider war.
Truman had had enough. With support from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he fired MacArthur, who had been a hero to many. Army Chief of Staff General Omar Bradley was more concerned with Europe and fearful of a land war in Asia. Bradley said Korea was the “wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with
U.S. troops bogged down in the snow and cold of Korea found the war far r difficult to fight than had been expected.
Chapter 24 The World the War Crea
CHINA
U . S . S . R .
M
North Korea Mil South Korea North Korean forces
»*« United States (United Nations) forces Chinese forces ® Capitals
MAP 24-4 The Korean War. At the beginning and end of the Korean war, the peninsula was divided into two nations at the 38th parallel. However, between 1950 and 1953, the dividing line moved many times as indicated.
the wrong enemy.” The new commander in Korea, General Matthew Ridgway, stabilized the defense lines and arranged better support and supplies for the troops.
The Chinese and American governments became resigned to a partial victory. Neither wanted a larger war, no matter what the two Korean governments thought. Battles for places the American troops called “Heartbreak Ridge,” or “No-Name Ridge,” described how those on the ground thought about what they were doing. Armistice negotiations began in the summer of 1951, but stalled over the fact that many Chinese and North Korean prisoners did not want to be returned home. It would take 2 more years, and the election of a new U.S. president, before the final armistice was signed in July 1953. More than 36,000 Americans were killed in the war, many times more Korean and Chinese troops, and probably 3 million Korean civilians. The final armistice line was not far from where the prewar line had been near Panmunjom. Sixty years later, Korea is still a tense and divided place.
24.2
Quick Review How did changing attitudes toward, and experiences with, the Soviet Union between 1945 and 1949 contribute to major changes in U.S. foreign policy?
708 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
POLITICS, 1948 AND 1952
Explain political developments that led to the elections of Truman and then Eisenhower as Cold War era presidents.
When Harry Truman became president in April 1945, few Americans knew much about him. Many expected Truman to merely serve out the term to which Roosevelt had been elected. Truman decided otherwise, but he had a lot of time and a lot of responsibility to manage before any thought of reelection loomed.
Riding A Tiger—Truman's First Term
As war and foreign policy dominated Trumans first months in office, Truman said he felt like he was riding a tiger. The liberal wing of the Democratic Party included New Deal activists such as Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace and Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes who never trusted Truman, viewing him as a product of Missouri machine politics who had been forced on FDR by the conservative wing of the party. Truman reciprocated the distrust. Looking ahead to the postwar world, Truman told Clark Clifford, one of his key advisors, “I don t want any experiments. The American people have been through a lot of experiments, and they want a rest from experiments.” But Truman was not proposing any sort of Warren Harding “normalcy.”
On September 6, 1945, just 4 days after the Japanese surrender, Truman proposed legislation that would implement FDR’s Economic Bill of Rights, expanding the federal role in public housing, public utilities, job creation, and national health, increasing the minimum wage, offering Social Security benefits to more people, while also making the Fair Employment Practices Commission permanent. It was a sweeping agenda, delighting liberals and dismaying conservatives. Southern segregationists filibustered the fair employment bill that would have continued FDR’s executive order, ensuring that employers with federal contracts could not discriminate among employees on the basis of race, and kept it from reaching a vote. Other bills were watered down by Congress. Congress turned Truman’s effort to launch a national system of health insurance into the Hill-Burton Act that benefitted doctors and hospitals and private medical insurers, but did not guarantee health insurance.
While there was Democratic as well as Republican opposition to Truman’s domestic agenda, the president’s single most powerful opponent was Ohio Senator Robert Taft, the son of the former president, known to many as “Mr. Republican.” Taft not only opposed Truman’s agenda but also pushed legislation that reduced taxes, forcing cuts in government programs, and persuaded Congress in 1947, over Truman’s veto, to pass the Taft-Hartley Act that lifted many of the protections organized labor had enjoyed since the passage of the Wagner Act in the 1930s.
Taft was not alone. The Republican Party was strong following World War II. As Truman understood, many people in the United States were tired of experiments, just as after World War I, many Americans simply wanted to be left alone. In the 1946 midterm elections, Republicans took control of both houses of Congress. But Harry Truman was a fighter, more of a fighter than some expected. His goal was to win a full term in his own right and elect a Democratic Congress in 1948, goals many thought unrealistic in 1946. The 1948 Election—A Four-Way Contest
In planning his campaign for 1948, Truman sought to maintain the New Deal coalition that had elected Roosevelt four times, and even sought to expand it. He wanted to have a large plurality among white blue-collar workers, immigrant groups, farmers, and poor people. He made special efforts to court African-Americans and Jews. In 1946, he appointed a President’s Committee on Civil Rights and its report, released in October 1947, led him to propose an antilynching law, a permanent fair employment commission, and laws against poll taxes and discrimination in transportation.
243
When the Republican Congress failed to pass these and other pieces of legislation, Truman called them “the do-nothing Congress.” Under pressure from civil rights leaders, Truman overruled the objections of some of the nations highest-ranking military officers and ordered the desegregation of the nations armed forces in 1948. It would take several years before the last segregated regiments were phased out, but the process was underway for a dramatic change from the segregated military of World War II.
Truman also favored the establishment of an independent state of Israel. On this issue, there was deep disagreement within the administration. Secretary of State Marshall threatened to resign if the United States gave support to Israel, and most leaders of the State, Army, and Navy departments opposed recognizing the new nation. They feared that the United States would permanently alienate the Arab world, jeopardize the smooth flow of oil to the United States and Europe, and create a situation that would remain tense and untenable. Those on the White House staff tended to support creation of a Jewish state in the Middle East. Truman’s own reading about the Holocaust and Middle Eastern history led him to support Israel. He got—and occasionally resented— considerable pressure from American Zionists. Thirty-three state legislatures passed resolutions favoring the establishment of a Jewish state. Truman responded to one anxious State Department official, “I have to answer to hundreds of thousands who are anxious for the success of Zionism. I do not have hundreds of thousands of Arabs among my constituents.” On May 14, as the last British forces left Palestine, Zionists proclaimed the independent state of Israel. At Truman’s direction, the United States immediately recognized the new government. To the surprise of many, Israel was able to defend itself successfully against an Arab attack and secure its borders and its existence.
Truman’s policies from fair employment to his support for Israel also had an impact on American voters. While many African-Americans were moving into the Democratic Party and most Jewish voters were prepared to support Truman after his May 1948 decisions, the road to nomination and election that year was not easy. Many New Dealers in the Democratic Party still hoped for a more liberal or a more popular candidate.
When it became clear that Truman would win the nomination—and invite Senate leader Alben Barkley to be his running mate—Henry Wallace, former vice president and commerce secretary, bolted and set up the Progressive Party to defeat Truman, end the Cold War, and return the country to what he saw as the Roosevelt legacy.
Then, when Truman supported a convention platform plank supporting civil rights, introduced by Minnesota Senator Hubert Humphrey at the Democratic convention, 35 delegates from Alabama and Mississippi walked out of the convention waving Confederate flags and proceeded to nominate South Carolina’s governor and future senator J. Strom Thurmond to run against Truman. These “Dixiecrats” were a serious threat to a party that always counted on the “solid South” to ensure national electoral victories.
The Republicans, sensing that this was their year, especially with the divisions in the Democrat ranks, nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, the 1944 standard bearer, with California Governor Earl Warren as his running mate. The team seemed to have everything going for it and ran a cautious campaign designed to avoid mistakes. Unfortunately for the Republicans, they were too cautious and Dewey was too stiff. Alice Longworth, Theodore Roosevelt’s daughter, called him, “the little man on the wedding cake.” The Wallace campaign never took off and gained little support though it may have denied Truman the majority in a few crucial states, especially New York. The Thurmond campaign got virtually no support outside of the Deep South though it did carry the electoral votes of four states Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. Truman waged a very tough and spirited campaign against the “do-nothing Congress” and the “Wall Street reactionaries.” As he campaigned, people started yelling, “Give em hell, Harry!” He had solid support from organized labor and farmers and held most of the New Deal coalition together. Still, the Republicans, led by Dewey, were confident of victory. But when the votes were counted, Truman won, receiving 24,179,345 votes to Dewey’s 21,991,291, and 303 electoral votes to Dewey s 189. Thurmond won 39 electoral votes. Wallace none.
710 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
As he began his new term in January 1949, Truman called his agenda the Fair Deal. The Truman Fair Deal included repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act, support for family farmers, a more progressive income tax, federal aid to education, an increase in the minimum wage, national medical insurance as well as another try to broadening Social Security, and expanded civil rights. In his inaugural address, Truman also called for more U.S. technical assistance to developing countries. Technical assistance became known as Point Four because it was the fourth point in Truman’s speech.
Even though the Democrats controlled both houses of Congress in 1949, virtually none of the Fair Deal legislation passed. Southern Democrats made sure there was no movement on civil rights, organized labor did not have enough support to overturn the Taft-Hartley Act, urban representatives saw little value in spending federal tax money on farmers, and the American Medical Association made sure that there was no national system of medical insurance such as most western European countries adopted after World War II. Point Four foreign aid passed, but the appropriations were small and the resulting technical assistance generally insignificant. Much of Truman’s second term was focused on the war in Korea—which the Congress
was willing to fund—and the ongoing Red Scare, which Truman did little to oppose.
Many were confident of a Republican victory in the 1948 election, including the editors of the Chicago Tribune, who published this erroneous early edition over which the eventual winner, Harry S. Truman, delighted to gloat.
A
War Hero Becomes President In a belated slap at Franklin Roosevelt, the Republican Congress passed the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution prohibiting any president from serving more than two terms, and a majority of states ratified the amendment. The amendment did not apply to the sitting president, and Truman considered seeking a third term. When he was defeated in the first primaries by Estes Kefauver, a crusading senator from Tennessee, however, Truman decided that two terms was enough and dropped out of the race. In spite of his spirited come-from-behind race in 1948 and his later reputation as a tough decision maker, Truman was not a widely popular president.
The most popular person in the United States in the early 1950s was Dwight David Eisenhower, known to everyone as Ike. Born in 1890 and raised in Abilene, Kansas by pacifist parents, Eisenhower had attended West Point, seeing it as a free education for a career in engineering. Instead, he became a long-term officer in the peacetime army between the wars, moving slowly through the ranks. He was still a colonel when World War II began, but was then promoted rapidly and commanded the Allied force that defeated Nazi Germany. He probably could have had the presidential nomination of either party in 1948 but opted to become president of Columbia University and then commander of NATO forces in Europe in 1951. He managed to convey a disinterested, “above the fray” persona. Some who knew him better saw another side. General George Patton said, “Ike wants to be President so badly you can taste it.”
While Eisenhower had served as a senior military commander under Democrats Roosevelt and Truman—and tended to agree with the anti-Communist wing of the Democratic Party on foreign policy matters, he was a fiscal conservative, and the New Deal and Fair Deal programs offended his sense of the proper role of the federal government. If he was going to run, it would be as a Republican. Liberals within the Republican Party, including the 1944 and 1948 standard bearer Thomas Dewey and Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, were desperate to find an internationalist” candidate who could stop the Republican front-runner, Senator Taft, an isolationist in foreign policy and a conservative on domestic issues. They courted Eisenhower who remained coy. However, primary voters made it clear that they preferred Ike to Taft: Ike defeated Taft 46,661 to 35,838 in the March New Hampshire primary even though he was still at NATO headquarters in Europe and did not campaign. After
Fair Deal
The name President Harry Truman gave to his policies to continue and extend many of the New Deal's domestic policies.
Chapter 24 The World the War
24 J
that primary, the momentum was hard to stop and Eisenhower was nominated by the Republicans in the summer of 1952—a bitter loss for Taft and his supporters.
Eisenhower asked California Senator Richard M. Nixon to be his running mate. Although the two were not close, and never were, Nixon brought balance to the ticket. Ike almost dumped Nixon at one point in the campaign because of charges that Nixon had a private, campaign fund donated by wealthy Californians. Nixon gave what became known as his “Checkers” television speech for its maudlin promise to keep the family dog, named Checkers, even though the dog had been a gift. The speech was a success, and Nixon stayed on the ticket. For the rest of his career, even after his own presidency, Nixon celebrated the day of the speech. At the age of 38, Nixon was considered young while Ike at 62 was considered old. Nixon had made his name with his search for Communists when he was a member of the House Un-American Activities Committee. In addition, he was from the West Coast while Ike’s strongest support was in the East.
The Democrats nominated Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson. Like Eisenhower, Stevenson was a strong Cold Warrior and a known internationalist who had been one of the founders of the United Nations. He had a reputation as an honest politician in a state where Democrats were often corrupt. He was more conservative than Truman on most domestic issues, especially race, and he selected Alabama Senator John Sparkman as his running mate, in part to ensure that there would be no Dixiecrat walkout in 1952. Stevenson was also very popular with many liberals, mostly because of his intelligence and wit. One said that his speeches were “simply gems of wisdom and wit and sense.” Unfortunately for Stevenson’s vote-getting, this skill mattered more to the party’s intellectual leaders than to many in the working class-black-urban coalition that had been key to the election of Roosevelt and Truman.
The campaign was the first in which television played a major role. The Republicans made effective use of short TV spots that carried brief comments by Ike along with his famous smile. Ike also promised a nation that was desperately tired of the war, “I shall go to Korea,” though it was unclear what he would do there. In November, Ike won 55 percent of the vote and carried the electoral college 442 to 89, winning even Florida, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia, states that had voted Democrat for decades. The Republicans won small majorities in Congress.
Eisenhower fulfilled his campaign promise and went to Korea. Early in his term, he was able to conclude the peace treaty that had eluded Truman. Korea remained divided, but the conflict ended. Ike intended to create what he called “Modern Republicanism.” He was a determined internationalist who kept the United States active in the UN and NATO. Under Ike, there would be no return to 1920s-style isolationism. He was determined to balance the federal budget and not likely to launch major new programs, but not roll back the major New Deal initiatives either. He once said, “Should any political party attempt to abolish social security, unemployment insurance, and eliminate labor laws and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history.” He dismissed the conservative wing of the Republican Party, saying of the conservative California Senator William Knowland, “In his case, there seems to be no final answer to the question, ‘How stupid can you get?”’
With Eisenhower s election, a new Republican administration was prepared to maintain many of the New Deal’s domestic policies and Truman’s Cold War internationalism. Individuals changed, but surprisingly little policy changed after the inauguration. Nevertheless, as the Great Depression and World War II receded and a new generation grew up with no memory of that difficult past, and as many Americans experienced unprecedented prosperity, the culture began to change. The 1950s were staid to some, surprisingly novel to others, and full of surprises for most.
243
Quick Review Aside from their political parties, how different were Truman and Eisenhower as candidates and as presidents?
712 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
CONCLUSION
The experience of World War II had a profound effect on American culture in the decade that followed the war. The federal government offered generous benefits to returning veterans, allowing a whole generation of young men to attend college, to buy homes, and to live comfortable middle class lives. Men and women, anxious to leave the war behind, married quickly and had children, a lot of children. The population soared in what was called a baby boom.
In the postwar era, the living patterns of Americans changed drastically. Many middle class white Americans left the cities for homes in newly created suburban communities. At the same time, the rate of migration of southern blacks to the urban centers of the North exploded. Many black migrants moved into city centers because they were excluded from suburban developments. Latinos from Puerto Rico and Mexico moved to American cities, notably New York and Los Angeles.
The economic gains achieved during the war continued throughout the postwar period, made possible, in part, by the position of the United States as the only remaining economic superpower in the world. Consumers, who had more money than ever, purchased goods produced by American manufacturers, achieved new levels of economic security and affluence, buying automobiles, televisions, and electric appliances in the postwar economy.
The end of the World War II also brought on new attempts at international cooperation. In an effort to create political and economic stability and a lasting peace, the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank, were ushered into being.
While enjoying the remarkable prosperity of the postwar era, more and more Americans became deeply concerned about the Soviet Union and the spread of communism. The containment of communism became the bedrock of U.S. foreign policy in the Truman administration. By 1952, both the United States and the Soviet Union possessed hydrogen bombs, and the possibility of “mutually assured destruction” set off a Cold War between the two countries that would last 40 years. In Europe, the Cold War was institutionalized in the western-led North Atlantic Treaty Organization founded by the United States and Great Britain and the eastern Warsaw Pact led by the Soviet Union. America’s uneasy relationship with the Soviet Union resulted in a second Red Scare within the United States itself. Fueled by the fiery rhetoric of Senator Joseph McCarthy and others, Americans began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere, and many personal and professional lives were ruined by accusations of treason, espionage, and Communist Party membership that often had little basis in reality.
In 1950, the American policy of containment was tested when North Korea attacked South Korea. The United States, with support from the United Nations, took up the defense of South Korea even after a huge army from Communist China attacked U.S. forces in the region. After fierce fighting, the outcome of the war was ambiguous. The United States and China signed an armistice that left Korea divided much as it had been since the end of World War II. With the election of a new president, Dwight Eisenhower, in November 1952, the nation that was tired of the war in Korea settled into what many hoped would be a new era of peace and prosperity even as they continued to fear the Soviet Union and the mushroom cloud of atomic destruction.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did the actions of the United States after World War II reflect its new posi-
tion as a world superpower?
Chapter 24 The World the War Crea
Chapter 24 Chapter Review
24.1
THE UNITED STATES IN
1945_______________________________ Describe the new technology, living patterns, and political arrangements in the United States that resulted from World Warll.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
How did advances in science and technology change everyday life for Americans in the 1950s?
2.	Cause and Effect
What explains the rapid growth of suburbs in the 1950s?
3.	Constructing an Argument
Why did the rate of African-American migration to the North explode after World War II?
4.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the migration of African-Americans and Latinos in the 1950s. What similarities and differences do you note?
6.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the anticommunist hysteria relating to World War I with the hysteria that followed World War II. What similarities and differences do you note?
7.	Historical interpretation
Why was the Korean War a turning point in the Cold War?
POLITICS, 1948 AND 1952
243
Explain political developments that led to the elections of Truman and then Eisenhower as Cold War era presidents.
Review Questions
8.	Cause and Effect
How did Truman’s policy initiatives during his first term impact the election of 1948?
9.	Historical Interpretation
Why was Eisenhower’s election a turning point in American politics?
THE COLD WAR BEGINS
24.2
Analyze the coming of the Cold War, tensions with the Soviet Union, and McCarthyism at home.
Review Questions
5.	Cause and Effect
Why did relations between the United States and the Soviet Union deteriorate so rapidly after World War II?
714 PartVIll Fears,Joys, and Limits 1945-1980

25
Complacency and C
1952-1965
Only the arrival of federal troops assured the integration of Little Rock High School in 1957.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Dwight Eisenhower was the U.S. Supreme Commander in Europe when Harry Truman became president in the spring of 1945. In that role, he worked for Truman as he had for Roosevelt. But when Eisenhower decided to enter the Republican race for the White House and attacked Truman and the Democrats during the campaign, the relationship between the two men was deeply strained. Between Eisenhower’s election victory in November 1952 and inauguration in 1953, the outgoing Truman administration had little to do with the new one. Nevertheless, once in office, Eisenhower made surprisingly few changes to Truman’s policies. The Republican Eisenhower ended the war in Korea, mostly with a veiled threat to use atomic weapons, and surprisingly, solidified core New Deal policies and the Cold War.
Eisenhower’s was a reassuring presence, and many considered his
8 years in office to be a time of complacency and stability in national life. However, the era was also one of extraordinary change. New technology, most of all television, changed the culture. Dissent from the dominant complacency was found in many places, most of all among the young and the more than 10 percent of Americans who were of African origin. The modern Civil Rights Movement began in the 1950s. The perceived stability and the many real changes of the 1950s are the focus of this chapter.
Demonstrate an understanding of how different aspects of the 1950s, from the seeming complacency of Eisenhower's time to the growing Civil Rights Movement reshaped the United States.
EISENHOWER'S AMERICA, AMERICA'S WORLD
Explain the continuation of the Cold War under a new Republican administration.
A CULTURE ON THE MOVE
Explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS
Analyze the growth and impact of the Civil Rights Movement between 1954 and 1965.
25.1
25.2
25.3
