CHAPTER 16
Conflict in the West, 1865-1912
The Tribes of the West and the U.S. Government The Impact of the Transcontinental Rail Road, 1869 The Transformation of the West
CHAPTER 17
The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order, 1876-1913
Technology Changes the Nation
Corporations and Monopolies
Lives of the Middle Class in the Gilded Age
Immigration
CHAPTER 18
Responses to Industrialism, Responses to Change, 1877-1914
Conflict in the New South
The Politics of Conflict—From Populist Movement to Populist Party Worker Protest and the Rise of Organized Labor
CHAPTER 19
Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics, 1879—1917
The Revolt of the Intellectuals The Transformation of Cities Religious Responses to the Gilded Age Progressive Politics on the National Stage
Conflict in the West
Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show created the image of the American West for many people, which was more fantasy than reality.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the post-Civil War changes in the American West
THE TRIBES OF THE WEST AND THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
16.1
Explain western development from an Indian perspective and the way Indian and white cultures shaped each other.
THE IMPACT OF THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROAD,
1869 16.2
Analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation, especially the West.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST
16.3
Analyze how indigenous people, ranchers, farmers, miners, outlaws, politicians, and mythmakers shaped the West and our understanding of its history.
In the midst of the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln worried about the potential for alliances between the Confederate States and some western Indian tribes. He met with 14 western chiefs at the White House in March 1863. He did not offer much but urged them to adopt the “peaceful ways of the white people.” Chief Lean Bear of the Cheyenne reminded the president that whites were responsible for most of the violence in the West. He did not mention the irony of Lincolns statement coming in the midst of the bloodiest war in American history.
Subsequent presidents had similar, usually unproductive, meetings.
President Grant tried hard to implement what came to be known as the Grant Peace Policy, but, though well intentioned, that policy ultimately depended on the U.S. Army to settle matters in the West, and the army in the field was often anything but peaceful. While the most intense interaction between white settlers and Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River lasted for over 200 years, the major battles between the western tribes and the U.S. Army lasted for less than 30 years. What began as a series of bloody skirmishes during the Civil War erupted into the Great Plains Wars in the 1870s and 1880s. By the 1890s, the armed conflict was all over as tribes were defeated and moved into ever shrinking reservations.
At the same time, white ranchers, farmers, and miners built new settlements across the West. What began as great cattle ranches were replaced within 30 years by smaller-scale farms producing beef and wheat for national and world markets. These agricultural developments of the
post-Civil War era depended on new technologies—most of all the development of railroads that brought supplies to isolated farmers and shipped their products—and on new economic and political arrangements. This chapter examines the growth and changing nature of the American West between 1865 and 1890.
16.1
Significant Dates
THE TRIBES OF THE WEST AND THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
Explain western development from an Indian perspective and the way Indian and white cultures shaped each other.
Native Americans fought on both sides in the Civil War and sometimes used the country’s division to expand their territory, forcing both North and South to divert troops from other battles. The Civil War also changed the lives of American Indians. For most whites, however, Indian matters existed only on the margin of their attention during the war. Once the Civil War ended, white relationships with Indian tribes, especially on the Great Plains, took on greater significance. As many Americans, whites and some blacks, began to look for more land in the aftermath of the war, they ran directly into newly empowered Indian tribes.
The Comanche Empire
For the Comanches, arguably the most powerful tribe on the western frontier in 1860, the Civil War was a great gift. The U.S. Army, the Texas Rangers, and other whites who had been harassing them for decades were called to fight against each other on distant battlefields. The Comanches welcomed their absence.
In 1700, the Comanches were a small tribe who had recently moved into what is now the Southwest of the United States. They developed expertise using two European imports, rifles and horses, becoming the much-feared “Lords of the South Plains.” The Comanches built a way of life based on hunting the buffalo, and like the buffalo, they traveled widely over the Great Plains. They also made alliances (especially with the Utes), traded (with everyone), and fought bloody battles (especially with the Apaches and the Europeans) while they stole horses and supplies as well as kidnapped settlers and people from other tribes. By the early 1800s, although they were without a permanent capital, borders, or bureaucracy, the Comanches ruled an empire that was equal in size and power to the United States or the Republic of Mexico.
Nevertheless, by the late 1850s, the Comanches seemed to be in decline. Working with Texas Rangers and with smaller tribes who had been Comanche victims, the U.S. Army began to gain the upper hand in Texas. The Comanches needed ample space for hunting, trading, and fighting; they had no interest in being settled in any permanent locations. In battles during 1858, over 100 Comanche warriors, including chiefs, were killed and a large number of women and children taken prisoner. Some Comanches were ready to seek peace. The Penateka Comanches, who had split from the larger tribe, gave up warfare and settled on a Texas reservation just before the Civil War.
The Civil War and, later, Reconstruction, opened up new opportunities for the Comanches. The war diverted troops from Texas to distant battlefields, and as early us 1863, Comanche raiding parties began to move back into parts of Texas they had left in the 1850s, stealing horses and cattle. When Texas joined the Confederacy, Comanches developed a brisk trade selling stolen Texas cattle to Union Army agents in New Mexico. With the coming of peace in 1865, the U.S. Army demilitarized any forces in Texas that had fought for the Confederacy in the Civil War, including the feared Texas Rangers. While U.S. Army troops were stationed in Houston, San Antonio, and along the border with Mexico, west Texas, with several million cattle wandering on huge range lands, was only lightly protected. The Comanche saw their opportunity. They developed a rich trade with prosperous New Mexicans who came to be known as the comancheros because of the trade.
450
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
1858 John Butterfield opens overland stage route | 1862 Congress passes the Homestead Act
1864	Navajo Long Walk to Bosque Redondo
1865	Civil War ends, units of U.S. Army return to patrol the West
Chicago Union Stock Yards opens
1867	Chisholm Trail to Abilene, Kansas
Medicine Lodge Creek Treaty between U.S. government and Comanche
1868	Treaty of Fort Laramie with Lakota Sioux Treaty of Bosque Redondo with Navajos
1869	Transcontinental Railroad completed at Promontory Point, Utah
President Grant announces new Grant Peace Policy for American Indians
1872	Modoc uprising in California
1873	Panic and Depression
U.S.
Army defeat of the Comanche Black Hills Gold Rush into Sioux territory in the Dakotas
1876	Battle of the Little Bighorn
1877	Nez Perce under Chief Joseph surrender to U.S. Army
1878	Billy the Kid and Lincoln County War in New Mexico
El Fronterizo, Spanish-language newspaper begins publication in Arizona Territory
1879	Beginnings of Carlisle Indian School
1881	Gunfight at the OK Corral Beginning of Great Dakota Land Boom
1882	Gustavus Swift creates new refrigerated rail car allowing shipment of meat
Opening of Anaconda Copper Mine in Montana
1883	Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show
Four standard time zones created for the United States
1887 Dawes Act begins dividing Reservations into private allotments
1889	Oklahoma Land rush; North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Washington become states
1890	Lakota Sioux Ghost Dance and massacre at Wounded Knee
White Cap resistance to land development in New Mexico
Idaho and Wyoming become states
1892	Johnson County War—Wyoming Stock
Growers Association drive out smaller ranches
1896 Utah admitted as a state
1907 Oklahoma admitted as a state
1912 New Mexico and Arizona admitted as states Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 451
Medicine Lodge Creek Treaty
An 1867 treaty between the Comanches and the U.S. Army in which the Comanches agreed to settle on a reservation.
From the mid-1860s into the early 1870s, great annual trading gatherings took place where comancheros, often backed by investors from the eastern United States, traded salt, hard bread, flour, sugar, tobacco, blankets, and knives as well as the ever-in-demand latest issue revolvers and rifles in exchange for cattle that the Comanches had recently acquired in Texas. The Comanches also continued to trade in people—Mexican and Indian captives, especially women, who were in great demand as brides in New Mexico. While these trading gatherings integrated the Comanches into U.S. markets, the stolen cattle and the continued trade in humans were sources of serious tensions between the Comanches and the governments of the United States and the state of Texas.
To restore order to the Southwest and open up new land for white settlement, U.S. peace commissioners met with more than 5,000 Comanches as well as Kiowas, Naishans, Cheyennes, and Arapahoes at Medicine Lodge Creek in Texas in October 1867. The U.S. delegation was led by William Tecumseh Sherman, head of the army of the West, a post he had also held during the Civil War. As a show of strength, the army team included 500 well-armed soldiers in dress uniform. A newspaper reporter also at the meeting wrote that the Comanches arrived “with all their war paraphernalia, their horses striped with war paint, the riders bedecked with war bonnets and their faces painted red.” They also knew a thing or two about a show of strength.
After elaborate opening ceremonies and the exchanges of gifts—including 6,000 pounds of coffee, 10,000 pounds of bread, and 3,000 pounds of tobacco from the government—the U.S. representatives made it clear they had come to Medicine Lodge Creek to end the Comanche status as a sovereign people. The government would help them become farmers on a reservation, but would not tolerate a continuation of the old hunting, trading, and stealing ways. Sherman concluded, “You can no more stop this [change] than you can stop the sun or the moon. You must submit and do the best you can.”
The Comanche chiefs were outraged by the government’s demands. Several, including Paruasemena, the leader of the Penateka Comanches, expressed their anger in eloquent responses, but in the end, the chiefs signed a treaty, although it was one that left much open to interpretation. The Medicine Lodge Creek Treaty provided for a Comanche reservation but also gave them the right to hunt on open plains below the Arkansas River in Indian Territory (Oklahoma). The government representatives assumed that the Comanches would become farmers on the reservation while venturing out on occasional hunting trips to track the buffalo. The Comanches thought that the reservation would make a perfectly good winter campground, and they were more than happy to receive government rations, but they had no intention of becoming settled farmers. Along with hunting buffalo, the Comanches expected to continue hunting for Texas cattle and trading them to New Mexico buyers.
The radically different interpretations of the Medicine Lodge Creek Treaty between the Comanches and the U.S. government became clear the next spring when several thousand Comanches, having spent the winter on the reservation, collected their government payments and began raiding cattle and horses in Texas, New Mexico, and Indian Territory. According to one report, 6,255 horses and 11,395 cattle were lost to Indian raids in Texas between 1866 and 1873.
After several unsuccessful peace efforts, the United States gave up on negotiations and ordered the army to attack and force the Comanches onto a permanent reservation. From 1871 to 1873, the army and the Comanches fought. While the army attacked, American buffalo hunters decimated the buffalo herds as industries found new uses for their hides. The buffalo had been at the heart of Comanche life, not only as food but also as a way to understand the universe, and their destruction undermined the Comanche way of life.
During the fighting from 1871 to 1873 a new Comanche leader emerged. Quanah Parker was the son of a Comanche chief and Ann Cynthia Parker, a white Texan who had been captured by the Comanches. He became the fiercest opponent of compromise with whites. Then in 1874, Isa-tai, a young Comanche spiritual leader or shaman, became prominent, sharing a message heard many times among different Indian tribes that if they would get rid of white ways and end their dealings with white
2 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
American Voices
Paruasemena (Ten Bears), Speech at Medicine Lodge Creek Treaty Meeting, 1867
16.1
Paruasemena was one of the Indian leaders to visit Lincoln at the
White House in 1863. Four years later, the 75-year-old leader spoke to the U.S. peace commission at Medicine Lodge Creek. The passion and pathos of the speech touched many.
My people have never first drawn a bow or fired a gun against the whites.There has been trouble between us...my young men have danced the war dance. But it was not begun by us. It was you who sent out the first soldier....
Two years ago I came upon this road, following the buffalo, that my wives and children might have their cheeks plump and their bodies warm. But the soldiers fired on us.. .The blue-dressed soldiers and the Utes came out from the night.. .and for campfires they lit our lodges. Instead of hunting game they killed my braves, and the warriors of the tribe cut short their hair for the dead.
So it was in Texas. They made sorrow in our camps, and we went out like the buffalo bulls when the cows are attacked. When we found them we killed them, and their scalps hang in our lodges. The Comanches are not weak and blind, like the pups of a dog when seven sleeps old. They are strong and farsighted, like grown horses. We took their road and we went on it. The white women cried, and our women laughed.
But there are things which you have said to me which I do not like.They were not sweet like sugar, but bitter like gourds. You have said that you want to put us on a reservation, to build us houses and make us medicine lodges. I do not want them. I was born under the prairie, where the wind blew free and there was nothing to break the light of the sun. I was born where there were no enclosures and everything drew a free breath. I want to die there and not within walls. I know every stream and wood between the Rio Grande and
the Arkansas. I have hunted and lived over that country. I live like my fathers before me and like them I lived happily.
When I was in Washington the Great Father told me that all the Comanche land was ours and that no one should hinder us in living upon it. So, why do you ask us to leave the rivers and the sun and the wind and live in houses? Do not ask us to give up the buffalo for the sheep. The young men have heard talk of this, and it has made them sad and angry. Do not speak of it more. I love to carry out the talk I get from the Great Father. When I get goods and presents I and my people feel glad, since it shows that he holds us in his eye.
If the Texans had kept out of my country, there might have been peace. But that which you now say we must live in, is too small. The Texans have taken away the places where the grass grew the thickest and the timber was best. Had we kept that, we might have done the things you ask. But it is too late. The whites have the country which we loved, and we wish only to wander on the prairie ti, we die.
Source: Taylor, Nathaniel G., et al., (1910) Papers Relating to Talks and Councils Held with the Indians in Dakota and Montana in the years 1866-1869. Washington: Government Printing Office. (Original in the National Archives, Records of the Indian Division, Office of the Secretary of the Interior, Record Group 48.)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Paruasemena characterize the conflict between his people and the United States government?
2.	Contextualization
What light does this document shed on the differences between white and Indian cultural values in the 1800s?
people, the buffalo would return and life would be good again. In a great camp meeting in June 1874, several hundred Comanche warriors led by Isa-tai and Parker joined with Kiowas, Cheyennes, and Arapahoes to eliminate the white presence from the Great Plains. The Comanche attacked the buffalo hunters.
The army counterattacked. On September 28,1874, U.S. forces attacked Parker s main encampment, and though nearly all of the Indians fled, the army destroyed the camp, taking the horses and burning tents, blankets, and food. Faced with starvation, the Comanches began to surrender in small groups, coming to the army post at Fort Sill in Indian Territory over the course of the winter where they gave up their horses and rifles and moved to the reservations assigned to them. Isa-tai was discredited among the Comanches from then on.
The winter of 1874—75 was the low point of Comanche life, but it was not the end. Quannah Parker was only 27 when he surrendered to federal authorities. Over the next 4 decades, he became principal chief of the Comanches and led them from warfare to farming and ranching. Parker was a tough negotiator with the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs for expanded land allotments. He had eight wives, built a fine 10-room house, and before he died he had his own telephone, owned a car, traveled by train, and went hunting with President Theodore Roosevelt. The life Parker and his people lived as he grew older was radically different from the life he had lived as a youth, but he helped create the foundation for tribal survival in a new era.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 453
Bosque Redondo
A reservation in central New Mexico where the majority of the Navajos and Mescalero Apaches were confined during the Civil War.
The Navajos and the Apaches
The Navajos, or Dine as they prefer to be called, were as warlike as the Comanches and dominated large swaths of New Mexico, Colorado, and Kansas. The Union army ended their rule and that of the Mescalero Apaches, too. In August 1862, Union Brigadier General James H. Carleton arrived in New Mexico in command of California volunteers, but when he learned that Confederates in the region had already been defeated, he ordered his troops to attack the Apaches and Navajos instead. In early 1863, the army invaded Apache lands and soon confined some 400 Apaches at a new reservation at Bosque Redondo in central New Mexico. Carleton then appointed Kit Carson to lead the attack on the much larger Navajo tribe of some 10,000 people. Carson told the Navajos, “Go to Bosque Redondo, or we will pursue and destroy you. We will not make peace with you on any other terms.” Carson kept his word, marching into Canyon de Chelly, the sacred Navajo heartland, attacking Navajo encampments as well as destroying orchards, crops, and livestock. By the spring of 1864, some 6,000 Navajos had surrendered rather than die of starvation. U.S. troops pursued other resisters, and eventually 8,000 Navajos were forced on the “Long Walk,” 300 miles south to a strange way of life at Bosque Redondo.
The Bosque Redondo reservation was a complete failure. The Mescalero Apaches considered the Navajos to be their “inveterate enemies,” and the two tribes had no interest in cooperating. The arid land of mid New Mexico could not support thousands of families, even if they did turn to farming as the government asked them to do. In addition, the Comanches saw the confined reservation as an opportunity to attack old enemies.
After the Civil War, a congressional peace commission visited Bosque Redondo and realized that the government had created a disaster. On June 1, 1868, they signed a new treaty with the Navajos that allowed them to return to a reservation in their own homelands. A new Mescalero Apaches reservation in central New Mexico was established by executive order in 1873 and expanded in 1883. Navajo leaders negotiated several expansions of their reservation between 1868 and 1886 so it covered a large part of New Mexico and Arizona up to the four corners area with Colorado and Utah. They also managed to avoid the division of the reservation into individual allotments that destroyed tribal ways for other tribes. With the shared experience of suffering at Bosque Redondo andthe substantial new lands, the Navajo tribe had become the Navajo Nation. They kept their promise to stop raiding and recreated much of their old ways, living on lands they considered sacred and making a living by herding sheep, goats, and horses. The tribe grew from 10,000 in 1864 to 30,000 in 1900, an unusual experience for American Indians.
Navajos under guard at Bosque Redondo, ca. 1864. 454 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
The Modocs, the Nez Perce, and the Pacific Coast Tribes
Well before the Civil War, the rapid influx of white settlers who came to California with the gold rush was a catastrophe for the many small tribes that dotted the state. The California tribes had already been weakened by decades of Spanish and Mexican efforts to turn them into workers on the missions and the large rancheros of the state. The new American presence only made things worse. Federal commissioners negotiated treaties with 139 tribes to create small reservations, mostly in northern California, but Congress did not ratify the treaties and white settlers ignored them. In spite of the efforts of federal Indian agents to create reasonable safeguards for the Indians of California, settlers and miners ignored restrictions on Indian land if they thought they could find gold or plant a settlement. California Indians were starved and all too often simply murdered. In 1845, before the United States took control of California, there were some 150,000 Indians in California—down from probably 300,000 when the Spanish missionaries first arrived; just a decade after California became a state, only 25,000 remained.
In the fall of 1872, Kintpuash, a leader of the Modoc tribe in southern Oregon and northern California, led his people out of a reservation the Modocs had shared with the Klamaths and Snakes since signing a treaty in 1864. Kintpuash did not like reservation life, and the Modocs returned to their homelands on Lost River in California. The U.S. Army followed and attacked them, but the Modocs knew the territory, especially the great black lava fields that provided hiding to those who had grown up among them. The Modocs resisted, killing soldiers, settlers, and government negotiators. Orders came from Washington “that the name of Modoc should cease,” because they had violated their treaty and killed federal negotiators. Eventually, the army won. Surviving Modocs were relocated in Indian Territory far from their homeland.
The Nez Perce, the tribe without whom Lewis and Clark would have perished, had long lived in Oregon and Idaho, but they were a deeply divided tribe. One group, known as the “progressives,” signed a treaty in 1855 agreeing to live on a large reservation in Idaho. Another group, the so-called “nonprogressives,” refused. They lived independently in an area encompassing the Salmon River in Idaho and the Snake River in Oregon.
For some time, the nonprogressive Nez Perce were allowed to live in peace, but as white settlement grew in the Snake River’s fertile Wallowa Valley, pressure came to force them and their leader Chief Joseph, or Hin-mah-too-yah-lat-kekt, onto the Idaho Reservation. They resisted, but by 1877, the Nez Perce knew they could no longer live unmolested in the Wallowa Valley. They began a long retreat to preserve their independence, a retreat that turned into a well-chronicled but tragic journey. Initially, the Nez Perce moved east across the Bitterroot Mountains into Montana hoping to find sanctuary with the Crow or Sioux. Then they turned north, hoping to cross into Canada. All along the way, the U.S. Army pursued them. Finally, when they were less than 40 miles from Canada, the army caught up. A few escaped across the border, but the majority, led by Chief Joseph, surrendered. The chief said, “I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed... .It is cold and we have no blankets. The little children are freezing to death... .My heart is sick and sad. From where the sun now stands, I will fight no more forever.” Most of those who had made the long journey with Chief Joseph ended up on a reservation in Indian Territory, although some, eventually including Chief Joseph, were allowed to return to the Pacific Northwest but never to their ancestral lands (see Map 16-1).
The Lakota Sioux—From Fort Laramie to the Little Big Horn and Wounded Knee
The Sioux, by far the largest group of tribes in the northern Great Plains, also fought fierce battles with the U.S. Army. Teton and Santee Sioux had been embroiled with U.S. settlers and army troops through the 1860s, but the largest battles of the 1870s were with the powerful Lakota Sioux.
In December 1866, the Lakota attacked and killed U.S. troops. Rather than risk further fighting, the government sought peace with the Lakota as well as their

4W
kJ
/

Chief Joseph of the Nez Perce who led the epic journey of his people.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West
16/1
Major battles Trails Cattle trail
Chief Joseph’s route Railroads
■HMMMNMM
MAP 16-1 The Plains Indian Wars. As trails and then railroads brought more settlers, the great battles between the U.S. Army and the Plains Indians erupted all across the Great Plains.
Cheyenne and Arapaho allies. In the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie, the Lakota Sioux, led by Red Cloud, promised to avoid war, and the army agreed to abandon three provocatively placed forts. (An earlier Fort Laramie Treaty of 1851 was negotiated simply to keep peace between the tribes and give the U.S. Army and settlers rights-of-way across the plains to California and Oregon.) Although the 1868 Fort Laramie Treaty could be seen as a victory for the Sioux, one faction, led by Sitting Bull, derided the treaty, reservation life, and the government annuities that were promised, saying to those who signed, “You are fools to make yourselves slaves to a piece of fat bacon, some hard-tack, and a little sugar and coffee.” Indeed, the treaty that Sitting Bull criticized did not protect the Lakota or the other tribes involved.
Less than a decade after the treaty was signed, when gold was discovered in the Black Hills and miners and settlers descended on the region, the government ordered the Lakota to leave winter camps and settle near the agency headquarters. The Lakota resisted. The Great Sioux War of 1876-77 had begun.
General George Armstrong Custer led a battalion of troops in an attack on the Sioux who were refusing to move. At the Little Bighorn River on June 25, 1876, Custer and his troops were surrounded by a much larger force of Sioux and Cheyennes. None of the army troops survived. It was perhaps the most famous Indian victory, but that success was soon followed by defeat. Less than a month after the Little Bighorn battle, General Philip Sheridan led a huge force that attacked and defeated the Sioux. The government then broke up the Great Sioux Reserve in the Black Hills of Dakota Territory, creating six much smaller reservations: Standing Rock, Cheyenne River, Lower Brule, Crow Creek, Pine Ridge, and Rosebud, while giving some of the best land, now declared “surplus,” to white settlers and miners.
456 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
General William Tecumseh Sherman led the U.S. delegation in negotiations with tribal leaders, which led to the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868.
The defeats of 1876-77, along with the destruction of the great buffalo herds, led to an era of depression, disease, and poverty for the Sioux. A little more than a decade later, in 1890, the religious phenomenon that had been seen among other tribes appeared among the Sioux. A spiritual leader, Wovoka, initiated the Ghost Dance movement, promising a return of the buffalo and the disappearance of white people if only the Sioux would take up the dance and return to their ancient ways, freeing themselves of dependence on white culture. The rise of the Ghost Dance frightened the white community, and the army was sent to Pine Ridge to investigate. A former Indian agent, Valentine McGillycuddy, appealed for calm saying, “I should let the dance continue... .If the Seventh-Day Adventists prepare their ascension robes for the second coming of the Savior, the United States Army is not put in motion to prevent them. Why should not the Indians have the same privilege?”
McGillycuddy also warned that “If the troops remain, trouble is sure to come.” He was right. One band of Sioux under the leadership of Big Foot left the reservation while the Ghost Dance continued, and U.S. troops went after them. When Big Foot and his band were caught, they returned to Pine Ridge without a fight but maintained their freedom. The next day, however, those who had followed Big Foot were asked to surrender themselves as prisoners. Ghost Dance leaders convinced them to make a stand. It was a fatal move. Gunfire erupted on the reservation and between 100 and 200 (some estimate as high as 300) Indians were killed. Armed Indian resistance in the West ended at Wounded Knee. The Sioux faced a bleak future after 1890, and it was decades before they made some of the same adjustments as the Navajos and Comanches.
Government Policy—The Grant Peace Plan and the Dawes Act
The rapid expansion of the nation after the Civil War added complex new issues to the government s Indian policy. The U.S. Army represented the U.S. government to Indians west of the Mississippi. Before the Civil War, the army’s goal was to limit warfare with and among the tribes while allowing white settlers transit across the Great Plains to California and Oregon. Few whites settled on the Great Plains before the 1860s, and the government was content to leave the Plains Indian tribes to themselves unless, like the Comanches, they fought directly with the army. The first Treaty of Fort Laramie in 1851 did not limit Indian land use except to try to keep the peace by keeping tribes
Ghost Dance
Part of a religious awakening among the Lakota Sioux in 1890 in which they believed that if they returned to their traditional ways and ceremonies, the whites would be driven from their land.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 457
16.1
Artist Frederick Remington depicted the 1890 Ghost Dance, which represented a hope for a new age.
Homestead Act
Law passed by Congress in 1862 providing 160 acres of land free to anyone who would live on the plot and farm it for 5 years.
apart from one another. No reservations were established. Rather, in exchange for gifts, the army asked the tribes to avoid conflict with one another, with military forts, and with the transit routes for the mail and for settlers. Asking for anything more was beyond the limits of what the 270 soldiers at Fort Laramie could reasonably ask in a meeting attended by perhaps 10,000 American Indians, including the Sioux, Arapaho, Cheyenne, Assinboins, Shoshones, Arikaras, Hidatsas, Mandans, and Crows.
After the Civil War, the pressure for space for white settlement greatly intensified. At the same time, U.S. Army units that had been fighting the Civil War were now available for service in the West. Among these units were segregated African-American units that were sent to the West and came to be known as Buffalo Soldiers because their white commanders thought their hair was like that of the buffalo. Even though most military units were demobilized after the war, there were more than sufficient numbers of soldiers—white and black—remaining in the army to provide a formidable fighting force in the West.
In 1862, a Republican Congress had passed, and President Lincoln had signed, the Homestead Act, fulfilling a major Republican campaign promise to make more federal land available for white settlement. The act provided 160 acres of federal land to a family that would settle and maintain the land for 5 years. The act, however, did not specify where the land would come from. Much of the initial homestead settlements were in Minnesota, Iowa, Nebraska, and Kansas, all on lands that had been prime buffalo hunting locations for various tribes. Unlike before the Civil War when most whites had moved across the Great Plains and kept going under the protection of U.S. Army, after the Civil War, whites were coming to the plains to stay and larger army forces were coming with them. In addition to farming, the discovery of mineral wealth in places like the Black Hills of the Dakotas brought more whites and further racial conflict.
Immediately after the war, the same Congress that was taking control of Reconstruction also created its own Indian peace policy and assigned the army to implement it. The battles with the Lakota Sioux led those in Congress to seek a peaceful way of proceeding, so they created the Indian Peace Commission to negotiate treaties with the Plains tribes. The congressional commission developed the idea of tribal reserves or reservations, large tracts of land that would, they hoped, be set aside for the Indians, protecting the tribes from encroaching white civilization while ensuring their eventual assimilation into white culture. It was same policy that had been used in negotiating with tribes that originally lived east of the Mississippi but with one big difference. The majority of eastern tribes had been forced onto reservations in the West, specifically, in Oklahoma or Indian Territory. There was no place further west to push the western
458 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
16.1
American Voices
Charles W. Allen, Report from Wounded Knee, 1890
Charles W. Alien, a white newspaper editor who had spent most of his life among the Sioux and was friendly with them, reported the event he saw while visiting his wife's family at the Pine Ridge Reservation on December 29, 1890. The first part of this report is taken from Allen's autobiography published in 1938. The second part is from a newspaper article he wrote for the Chadron Democrat three days after the events took place.
Presently all the Indian men began coming in bunches of from two to a dozen or more, stringing leisurely along then taking their seats in a circle on the grass before the commander and his staff....Then General Forsyth addressed in a firm but conciliatory manner.. ..[H]e told them that for the time being they were prisoners, and as such they were to give up their arms peaceably....He then told them to go back to their lodges, bring all their firearms, and turn them over to him. The Indians departed for their camp in a reluctant, obviously sulky mood....
After what seemed an unreasonable length of time the Indians came strolling back pretty much as they had come to the first meeting, except that they seemed purposely to adopt a more independent swagger in approaching the council field. Many of them were painted hideously and conspicuously grim of visage.... Quite a number of their wives had accompanied the braves to this meeting, robed in long blankets reaching almost to the ground, and each took a position immediately behind her husband... .The women who stood close behind their men concealed, under each blanket, a repeating rifle and well filled cartridge belt....
Chief Big Foot had been escorted from his tent, and urged his followers to maintain peace and comply with the general's orders....I also observed a Hotchkiss gun that had been placed in commanding position on a small knoll at the north edge of the camp, not far from the site on which the Catholic church now commemorates the tragedy....
Gen. Forsyth ordered a detail of dismounted troops under Capt. Wallace to close in and surround them at a distance of about twenty paces....During this procedure, which was very interesting, an Indian ghost dance master, arrayed in full paraphernalia, began to make medicine, holding his hands up to the sun and calling upon the Messiah to visit his wrath upon the soldiers. He would take up hands full of dirt and scatter it, then hold up his hands as if momentarily expecting the earth to open and swallow up the troops. It was evident that he was getting the Indians worked up and he finally told them to be brave and that bullets would not hit them if the soldiers did shoot at them. The commander was told of what he was saying, and he ordered him to sit down, which order he finally complied with after he had walked clear around the circle as though he owned the earth....They had proceeded to disarm but some eight or ten of these, when the brave who had been inciting them jumped up and said something and fired at the soldier who was standing guard over the arms that had been secured. The first gun had no sooner been fired than it was followed by hundreds of others and the battle was on. The fighting continued for about a half hour, and then was continued in skirmish for another hour.
Source: Charles W. Allen, From Fort Laramie to Wounded Knee: In the West That Was, edited with an introduction by Richard E. Jensen (originally published 1938, republished Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1997), pp. 192-202.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
As Allen told the story, who was responsible for the fighting at Wounded Knee?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In what ways did Wounded Knee mark the end of an era in American history?
tribes, so the government tried to move them onto as limited an amount of land as possible. At the same time, of course, confining the tribes on reservations would ensure that most of the land of the West could be opened for white development. The plan was not a great success. Tribes like the Sioux, Nez Perce, and Comanches resented the confinement of reservation life and often wandered far beyond their assigned bounds.
When Ulysses S. Grant became president in 1869, he initiated a new Indian Peace Policy that became known as Grant’s Peace Policy. Grant’s thinking was shaped by the terrible bloodshed he had seen in the Civil War and by his identification with the emancipation of slaves. He wanted to end the corruption that he saw in the Indian Bureau, and he wanted to treat the Indians with dignity. His goal was peace. At the same time, Grant wanted room for white settlement and was certainly not planning to keep whites out of the vast tracts of western land that the Indians used for hunting. In his first annual message to Congress in December 1869, Grant said there was no turning back the clock, that the past “cannot be undone, and the question must be met as we now find it.” Meeting the question, he believed, meant assimilating Indians
Grant's Peace Policy
A new effort by President Grant to end the Plains Indian wars by creating a series of reservations on which tribes could maintain their traditional ways.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 459
Dawes Act
An 1887 law terminating tribal ownership of most reservation land and allocating some parcels to individual Indians while the remainder was opened for white settlement.
into white society, or as the president asked, cannot the Indian be made a useful and productive member of society by proper teaching and treatment. Since most of the Indians did not want to become “useful and productive members of white society, Grant’s policy may have been doomed from the beginning, but he tried to find a humane solution to the clash of quite different cultures in the American West.
When Grant announced his Peace Policy he said,
Ihe building of rail-roads and the access thereby given to all the agricultural and mineral regions of the country is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of Indians... .1 see no remedy for this except in placing all the Indians on large reservations.. .and giving them absolute protection there.
Grant then appointed a member of the Seneca tribe, Ely S. Parker, as the first Native American Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the first nonwhite to hold a high government position. Grant also turned to Christian missionaries, not the army or the Indian Office, to take the lead in managing reservation affairs. He declared the reservations off limits to the army, even troops who were chasing Indians with whom they had been in battle.
Ihe missionaries, people like the Quaker Lawrie Tatum who was appointed to lead the Comanche and Kiowa reservation, tried to make the peace policy work. But government supplies were slow in coming and often of shoddy workmanship. Many Indians resisted the confinement of reservation life. The army was frustrated by the rule that they could not follow Indians into the reservation asylum even as they were expected to police the non-Indian territories. General Sheridan condemned the Peace Policy saying, “If a white man commits murder or robs, we hang him or send him to the penitentiary; if an Indian does the same, we have been in the habit of giving him more blankets.” The Indians, seeing through the references to peace, considered the whites as thieves who were stealing their land.
Although the Indian Peace Policy remained in force, the army simply ignored it. Sherman’s defeat of the Comanches in 1874-75 was in violation of the policy that army units could not enter reservations, but the general was praised, not reprimanded. Within a year after Custer’s 1876 defeat, the army had subdued nearly all of the Sioux. Crazy Horse, one of the Sioux who was at the Little Big Horn the day Custer died, became an army scout and was killed at an army post in September 1877. Sitting Bull was arrested in 1881 after returning from exile in Canada. He toured briefly with Buffalo Bill Cody’s Wild West Show in the 1880s and then retired to the Standing Rock reservation where, as the Ghost Dance movement grew, he was killed in a standoff with other Sioux sent by the army to arrest him. But the Grant Peace Policy had unofficially died long before the old chief met his end.
Within a decade of the last major Indian wars in the 1870s and the settlement of most western Indians on reservations, the U.S. government again began to change policy. By the 1880s, reformers in and out of government were concluding that the assimilation of Indians into white society—a goal many shared—would not happen as long as they maintained their ancient ways on reservations. If the key to Indian survival was for them to become independent farmers who attended churches and schools just as whites did, then why, reformers asked, should they live on reservations? Why not give them all the benefits of the Homestead Act and allow Indians, like whites, to gain free title to their own 160-acre farm and American citizenship?
In response to these arguments, Congress passed the General Allotment Act, known as the Dawes Act for its prime sponsor Massachusetts Senator Henry L. Dawes, in 1887. Ihe Dawes Act divided the reservations into 160-acre tracts to be assigned to each family. After a 25-year waiting period, Indian families could sell the land like their white neighbors. Indians who took possession of a homestead also became U.S. citizens. At first glance, the Dawes Act might seem like an enlightened piece of legislation and at least some of its sponsors certainly believed that it was.
The Dawes Act had other provisions, however, that led to negative results. Indian culture was tribal and communal, and hunting was a major activity; however, the Dawes Act pushed Indians to be farmers and to join an individualistic culture that many found to be quite alien. Beyond that, the most immediate impact of the act
460 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
was that, after each family on a reservation was allotted its 160 acres, all “surplus” land could then be sold by the government to white families. Later, after the 25-year waiting period, Indian families sometimes sold their land, giving them a profit but alienating them from their tribe. A few tribes, the Navajos and the Senecas, were able to avoid implementation of the Dawes Act and retain communal ownership of their reservations. But for many, the act was an economic and cultural disaster.
In 1881,155 million acres were set aside as reservations belonging to Indian tribes. As a result of the Dawes Act, Indians controlled only 78 million acres by 1900. While the Dawes Act broke up tribal lands, other federal perspectives undercut Indian culture. Few white authorities believed that the First Amendment protections of religious freedom applied to Indian religion, especially because Indian religion and Indian warfare were often linked. It was not until 1978 that Congress declared traditional Indian religions to have First Amendment rights.
Sending Indian young people to special schools was also seen by officials as one of the surest ways of implementing Grant’s promise to “favor any course towards them which tends to their civilization and ultimate citizenship.” In 1875, the army ordered 72 Indian prisoners—among them, Cheyenne, Arapahos, Kiowas, Comanches, and Caddos— moved from Fort Sill in Indian Territory to a new federal prison in St. Augustine, Florida. Lieutenant Richard Henry Pratt, a Civil War veteran who was put in charge of the prisoners, decided to create a model Indian school. He hired Sarah Mather from Mt. Holyoke College, and the two began what they believed was an essential mission to teach the prisoners American-style dress, the English language, and Protestant Christianity. Ihe isolation of the prisoner-students made the process easier. Soaring Eagle, a Cheyenne warrior, said, “It is good to go to church.. ..When I go home, I hope to sit down and sing God’s hymns.” Of course, Soaring Eagle and the other prisoners knew that about the only chance they had to actually go home was to comply with the school’s policies.
Pratt and Mather’s experiment drew widespread praise. They were authorized to expand their efforts and open the Carlisle Indian School in old army barracks in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. Twenty-five Indian boarding schools, eventually both Catholic and Protestant, were built on the Carlisle model between 1879 and 1902. Using federal tax dollars, these schools taught religion, western customs, and values to their Indian students.
Indian students resisted the goal of the boarding schools to transform them, though such resistance was harshly punished. Francis La Flesche, an Omaha who attended a Presbyterian mission school in the 1860s, reported that he and his friends spoke English during the day, but at night when the missionaries were gone, they continued to tell each other the Omaha stories and speak the Omaha language.
Carlisle Indian School
A boarding school for Native American children opened in Carlisle, Pennsylvania to teach white ways and separate Indian children from tribal culture.
M t
16.2
I
Quick Review How did actions after the Civil War—in particular, reassigning U.S. Army units to the West and offering land for white settlement through the Homestead Act—irrevocably change life for Indians in the West?
THE IMPACT OF THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROAD,
1869 16J
Analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation, especially the West.
When he proposed his Indian Peace Policy in December 1869, Grant said that it was needed because “[t]he building of rail-roads.. .is rapidly bringing civilized settlements into contact with all the tribes of Indians.” Only 7 months earlier at Promontory Point, Utah, Leland Stanford, governor of California and president of the Central Pacific Railroad, and T. C. Durant, vice president of the Union Pacific Railroad, had driven the last spike made of California gold—to connect the first rail line that spanned the North American continent.
The dream of a transcontinental railroad gained widespread support in the 1850s. An army survey in 1853 offered four possible routes across the country variously ending in
Transcontinental railroad
The Union Pacific rail line from California and the Central Pacific line connected with Chicago and other eastern cities, it was the first rail line to allow train travel all across the United States.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 46
When crews building the Union Pacific Railroad and the Central Pacific Railroad met at Promontory Summit, Utah, in May 1869, the nation celebrated the completion of the first transcontinental railroad.
Chinese crews, working in the isolated mountains of California, had to blast tunnels and build bridges to complete the rail line.
Portland, San Francisco, Los Angeles, or San Diego, each of which was considered. Even more serious debate focused on where the routes should begin. Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas wanted them to start in Chicago, while Mississippi Senator Jefferson Davis wanted them to begin in Memphis or New Orleans. It had been Douglas s dream of a route starting in Chicago that originally led him to propose the Kansas-Nebraska Act. But before the issue of the best transcontinental rail route could be settled, the Civil War had intervened. Once the war began in 1861, the departure of Southerners from Congress meant that a more northerly route became the obvious choice of the remaining members. Ihe Pacific Railroad Act passed easily in 1862. Ihe California-based Central Pacific started building east from San Francisco and Sacramento while the Union Pacific started building west across the Great Plains from various terminals in Kansas, Nebraska, and Missouri, all of which were already connected to the east coast by existing rail lines. Ihe federal government provided a 400-foot right of way, federal loans, and major land grants to the two railroads. Construction moved very slowly during the war, but the coming of peace in 1865 brought a rush to complete the work.
Ihe hard physical labor of actually laying track was done mostly by Irish workers on the Union Pacific and by Chinese laborers on the California-based Central Pacific. Those starting in the east were sometimes able to lay track at the rate of four rails per minute, covering 500 miles and reaching Cheyenne, Wyoming, by November 1867. Those starting in California had the far more difficult task of crossing the Sierra Nevada Mountains. They had to build snow sheds and blast through solid rock to make their way. Finally in the spring of 1869, the lines connected, and the nation was knit together as never before.
Ihe first rail connection across the continent was only the beginning. By the early 1890s four major lines reached across the country, connecting to a large network of midwestern and eastern rail lines. The major cities within California, Oregon, and Washington were connected by their own lines. All of the country’s large cities, and most of the mediumsized ones, were connected by rail. A city without a rail link was doomed to wither.
Technological changes helped extend the railroads. George Westinghouses invention of an air brake system in 1873 made trains safer and the rides smoother as it became possible to stop all of the cars of a train at once rather than needing to coordinate the work of a brakeman on each car. Eli Janney invented a safer system for coupling and decoupling railway cars, saving the lives of innumerable railway workers. Safer construction of tracks and bridges, the replacement of iron rails with steel, and new improved locomotive production all improved speed and safety. Although travel to the California Gold Rush in 1849 took 6 to 8 weeks or more, by the 1870s, a person could travel across the United States in 10 days and, if one could afford it, do so in the comfort of a Pullman sleeping car.
The railroads linked communities with a speed that created a new sense of time. When a traveler moved by horse or wagon, the exact time of day did not matter that much. Trains, however, needed to follow a schedule if passengers and freight were to depart and arrive on time and collisions were to be avoided. Schedules, particularly coordinating trains over great distances, required something no one had considered before—standardized time. Although some objected, like the Cincinnati editor who asked why his city should shift its clocks “so as to harmonize with an imaginary line through Pittsburgh,” the clear majority of the country readily agreed to the plan. On Sunday, November 18, 1883, known as the “Day of Two Noons,” all but the most isolated American communities adjusted their clocks to place them in one of the four time zones into which the nation was being divided—time zones that still regulate daily life today.
What had once been isolated regional economies quickly became part of a national commercial network because of railroads. The cost of moving food and other goods dropped dramatically. People followed the same time schedule. The railroads that crossed the continent
462
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power-Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
ended at docks where ocean-going steamships carried food, lumber, and other materials from the United States to Asia and South America. Within three decades of acquiring the West Coast, the United States was connected to a Pacific market of international trade and commerce that would create work for many—from lumberjacks in Oregon and Washington to miners in Idaho or the Dakotas to wheat farmers across the Midwest—creating wealth for a few and linking the nation’s economy to the rise and fall of world markets. After 1890, a glut of wheat in Argentina could impact the life of a farmer in Nebraska, and a drop in the value of silver in Japan could hurt a miner in Idaho. Even though the United States was not quite yet a major world power, it was connected to the world as never before (see Map 16-2).
Quick Review How did railroads improve transportation and communication in ways that other innovations such as canals and steamboats could not?
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST
16.3
Analyze how indigenous people, ranchers, farmers, miners, outlaws, politicians, and mythmakers shaped the West and our understanding of its history.
The defeat of the Indian tribes and the Homestead Act, along with extraordinary changes in time, speed, and transportation brought on by the railroads, transformed the American West. Land that had been part of Mexico in the 1840s and that people from the East Coast only wanted to get across in the 1850s became the site of vast new ranches, settled farms, and rapidly expanding towns. By the 1880s and 1890s, a new region was becoming part of the nation’s cultural, economic, and political networks.
Of course, not all of the new settlers in the American West got along with each other. Cattle ranchers depended on vast wide-open spaces to feed and move their herds. Farmers seeking to establish 160-acre homesteads depended on barbed wire to fence off their land, and keep cattle out. Older residents of what had been the northern parts of Mexico had relied on sometimes vague property lines and depended on communal grazing lands while the newly arriving Americans wanted precise lines and built fences across the land that had once been held in common. Settlers seeking to establish farms or build towns depended on law and order while others—outlaws and gunfighters—thought that the best way to make one’s fortune was to take it from others. As these groups battled for control, they soon came to create political organization if not always social order.
Cowboys, Cattle, the Open Range, and Barbed Wire
White families seeking to make their fortune, or at least a living, raising cattle moved into southwest Texas in the 1850s, expanding throughout the West by the 1860s and 1870s. Allowing the cattle to graze the vast open areas enabled herders to manage larger numbers than if they had to confine them to pens with feed. Texas Longhorn cattle, the result of interbreeding cattle of Spanish origin and Anglo-American stock, seemed especially perfect for the region. They could survive on easy-to-find grass on the wide plains, did not need additional feed, and were resistant to Texas fever, the tick-born disease that killed other cattle. Further north in Kansas, Nebraska, and the Dakotas, other cattle ranchers also discovered that cattle thrived on the bunchgrasses of the northern prairies, which dried out by mid-summer but retained its protein and fed cattle well, even when they had to find it through the snow.
By the time the Civil War called most of the cattlemen off to distant battlefields and left the cattle to fend for themselves, there were probably 5 million cattle in west Texas. Although the Comanches took their share of the abandoned cattle, many remained by the end of the war, and some herds grew substantially, having been allowed to breed without being slaughtered for food for several years.
In the summer of 1865, returning veterans reconnected with families and sought to reestablish the herds on which their families depended. Lee Moore remembered helping his veteran father reassemble a herd in southwest Texas, We didn t call it roundup
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 46:
16,1

C AN\
i
OREGON
(1859)

Promontory Point j
WYOMING f. (V890)/
W

sadwoodSC
^4

MINNESOTA .(W
^$weri0/r
u& —
27 GREAT
*fSima City b Hill
BASIN
NEVADA (1864)
\ Rock Springs I Salt Lake City^ Q
/UTAH*.
(1896)
Los Angeles*
PACIFIC
OCEAN
-----Railroads
_ cattle drives
Gold IB Silver

/SarttaFe . ' Railroad ,

►enV
Rio Grande F Railroad
^MISSOURI
(1821)
AIMSAS (1836)7

ARIZONA .	__
TERRITORY ■'-'%£&' i Santa Fe ’
coBi
iEi Paso
San
Angelo
MEXICO
GULF
OF
MEXICO
%

$ssra
817) \
200	300 Miles
_J__________I
o 100	200	300 Kilometers
MAP 16-2 Connecting the Nation. Rail lines and cattle trails connected far flung parts of the West. Gold and silver mines, cattle ranches, and wheat farmers were suddenly part of a worldwide market.
in those days. We called it cow-hunts and every man on this cow-hunt was a cattle owner just home from the war and went out to see what they had left and to brand up.
Most of those trying to reassemble herds in 1865 could not be called ranchers. They did not own or maintain ranches, as such. Rather they allowed their cattle to graze freely on the open Texas land officially owned by the federal government, though contested by various Indian tribes. They identified their cattle by branding them when they were young. Unbranded cattle—known as mavericks—were free for the taking. The few who did own ranches managed vast operations, like the huge King Ranch where Richard King owned 84,000 acres at the end of the Civil War, eventually expanding to 1,270,000 acres. The King Ranch was one of several huge ranches in Texas and New Mexico, but much of the cattle raising in the 1860s and 1870s was a much more informal affair that depended on respect for cattle brands rather than fenced private lands.
Several developments account for the huge increase in cattle ranching in the decades after the Civil War. Americans started to eat a lot of beef, and in prosperous times, they
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
464
could afford to do so. Cookbooks reported new ways to prepare beef while telling readers that pork, which had fed much of the nation in earlier times, was unwholesome and hard to digest. Hiram Latham, a publicist for the Union Pacific Railroad wrote a pamphlet, Trans-Missouri Stock Raising, in 1871 that declared the only way to support the nation’s manufacturing workers was to ensure they had a large supply of clothing and cheap food, food that needed to include a healthy amount of beef (see Map 16-3).
In spite of the ease of raising cattle, particularly in Texas, Colorado, Wyoming,
Montana, it was a long distance from those areas to the mouths of most Americans, whether on the Pacific Coast or in the Midwest or on the Atlantic Coast. In 1867, Joseph G. McCoy founded Abilene, Kansas, one of the nation’s first cattle towns, to facilitate the loading of cattle onto transcontinental trains that would speed the beef to consumers. Jesse Chisholm began herding cattle along what came to be known as the Chisholm Trail from Texas, across Indian Territory, to Abilene to connect with those railroad lines. In 1867, some 30,000 cattle made their way along the Chisholm Trail, and over the next 20 years, 2 million more followed.
Not surprisingly, Abilene and other towns at the end of the drive became wild places when the cattle drive reached town. Cowboys, young single men who had spent many months following the herds, were ready for a party when they got to town. The infamous Longbranch Saloon and the Dodge House Hotel, both in Dodge City, Kansas, hosted many celebrating cowboys. These environments offered some of the only economic opportunities for women in the cattle industry, and those opportunities were less than reputable. Prostitution was often the only way to survive and sometimes was a route to independence. A Wichita newspaper reported on the “ten bawdy houses” in Newton, Kansas, in 1871: “Here you may see young girls not over sixteen drinking whisky, smoking cigars, cursing and swearing.” Most prostitutes in the cattle towns were very young, between 14 and 23, and from the eastern United States, Europe, and even Indian Territory. Few stayed in the business for very long.
As the demands for beef increased and cowboys brought more cattle into the railroad towns, developments in rail transport made the cattle industry more profitable. In 1882, Gustavus Swift created a new fleet of refrigerated railroad cars. Beef spoiled or took on an odd and unappetizing look in earlier refrigerator cars when it was packed in ice. Swift kept the ice separate and above the beef so the beef stayed cold without touching ice. A few Chicago packinghouses—Swift, Armour, Morris, and Hammond— along with smaller ones in Kansas City, Omaha, and Forth Worth, came to dominate the nation’s meatpacking industry. By 1900,82 percent of the nation’s cattle were killed and packed in such places. The Chicago’s Union Stock Yards, first opened in 1865 to distribute cattle to these facilities, became the hub for feeding the world.
As the beef industry became more centralized in the 1870s and 1880s, it continued to depend on the muscle of cowboys who cared for cattle, kept track of them when they drifted away, and handled the roundups and cattle drives. The greatest era of the cowboys of the American West was between the Civil War and 1900. The cowboys who did the work of the cattle industry were mostly poor, mostly young, and of many different backgrounds.
In spite of the lonely days and only rare occasions to celebrate, cowboys themselves often did all they could to contribute to the romantic legend that surrounded them. Nat Love, for one, was born a slave in Tennessee in 1854. After the Civil War, he moved west and worked as a cowboy. He was good at the work and in 1876 won roping and shooting contests in Deadwood, South Dakota, that gave him a prize of $200. From then on, he was known as Deadwood Dick and his own autobiography as well as the popular dime novels that told Deadwood Dick stories made him a legend, even if some of those who repeated his story left out the crucial fact that Deadwood Dick was an African-American cowboy.
In the 1860s, many of the cowboys in Texas were white Confederate veterans, and those in Kansas or Montana were Union veterans. Still, there were a relatively large number of African-Americans and American Indians among them. Cattle companies, especially in Texas, soon began replacing the Anglo cowboys with those of Mexican descent whom they could pay substantially less. In 1883, white cowboys in Texas
1O
MAP 16-3 Cattle Trails and Rail Lines. Cattle were driven north from Texas and parts of Kansas and Nebraska to rail lines where they could be moved to world markets.
16J
16J
struck for higher wages, but the Panhandle Cattleman’s Association quickly broke the strike and found new sources of labor among poor single men of all races who wanted any job or who thought the work might be glamorous.
As the cattle business came to be controlled by larger ranches and corporations in the 1880s and 1890s, cowboys became less independent and more like hired workers in other industries, liable to be assigned to fence building one day and cattle branding the next. Nevertheless, herding cattle over great distances required skill, especially using a rope to lasso and understanding the behavior of herds. Ihe most successful cattle producers knew that they had to provide for their staff. Cowboys had originally carried their own food, but cattle owners began to supply the food from specially constructed wagons, accompanied by a cook, who provided the meals on the range. The first rancher to carry food and bedding for the roundups and trail drives was Charles Goodnight, and in his honor, the wagons came to be known as “Chuck Wagons.”
Although the cattle industry prospered, it also experienced significant changes and downturns. Branding cattle—using a hot iron to create a scar on the left flank of a calf that was easy to identify—was key to identifying cattle who roamed over very large areas of range, perhaps a hundred miles or more. While branding continued, by the 1880s, cattle owners began using barbed wire fences to set off their ranges. Barbed wire fences kept herds in more contained areas and protected the best grass. Of course, protecting the grass meant identifying who had the rights to certain areas, which brought cattle ranchers into conflict with each other and with the federal government since most of
,	the western ranges were federal lands. The conflict often turned violent, perhaps most
L6 V
Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914 smbIbbksSSI

_	-	*-•-£ -x-jgg?
MUBHMWhhHi
.1001

BWBWiB
IO

i ®«W»WWWSW i
Most of a cowboy's life was hard, lonely work.
dramatically in the Johnson County War of 1892 when the Wyoming Stock Growers Association hired gunfighters to force smaller ranchers out of the state.
Success also depended on the price of beef staying high and a ready supply of cattle, both of which were problematic. Ihe winters of 1880-81, 1884-85, and 1886-87 were all unusually harsh. Cattle died for lack of food, or they drifted in front of a storm until they piled up against a barbed wire fence and died. In addition, economic recessions in the 1870s and again in the late 1880s led Americans to eat less beef. By the mid-1880s, the market for the 20 million cattle in the American West was declining. After a recovery, another depression in the 1890s made it hard to predict what the value of cattle would be in any given year.
By the end of the 1890s, the era of open ranges, roundups, and huge cattle drives was coming to an end. Growing demand for high-quality beef and new knowledge about the best feed enabled the cattle industry to shift to smaller scale ranches where a rancher could maintain a few hundred cattle, ensure that they were well fed and cared for, and bring them to market at the best moment.
The male world of the cowboys was replaced by ranch families. Men still did most of the work with the cattle while wives and daughters tended houses and gardens doing the “inside work.” But in isolated communities, rigid gender lines were hard to maintain. A woman who lived on a Wyoming ranch in 1899 wrote, “The heavy work of the ranch naturally falls to men, but I think most ranch women will bear me out in saying that unless the women... be always ready to do anything that comes along.. .the ranch is not a success.” Cowboys still worked on these ranches and urban Americans still ate beef, but the world of beef production and life on the plains was quite different than it had been only a short time before. Latino Resistance in the Southwest
Mary A. Fulgenzi, a long-time resident of San Miguel County in New Mexico Territory, recalled the time in the late 1880s when tensions in her county exploded:
In the early days of Las Vegas the wealthier people wanted to take possession of most of the lands. They fenced in any land they fancied, whether it belonged to them or not. The poor people also needed land to graze their stock and felt that they should have their share, for, according to the land grant, lands not allocated to individuals were to be used by the community in general.
Throughout much of the West, the battle between those who wanted to fence and control the land and those who wanted free grazing land for their herds was one of the great divides. The emergence of cheap barbed wire changed the face of the West. The specific details about contained and open grazing were different in different places and for
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West
16.1
16 J
Explore the New Economy of the West, 1850-1893 on
16.3
My HistoryLab
WHAT NEW ECONOMIC PATTERNS EMERGED IN THE WEST?
The second half of the 1800s brought quick expansion of the United States into the West. Railroads quickly spread across the region, spurring town development and creating a giant national marketplace that stretched from coast to coast. The federal government established post offices through the West to help further connect the nation. Settlers streamed from the East in search of cheap land on which to raise their crops and livestock. The West became an important agricultural region as farm products then moved along the railroad network linking western towns with eastern and international markets.
This patriotic lithograph, titled "Across the Continent—Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way," represents the expansion into the American West made possible by the nation's first transcontinental railway, which was completed in 1869.
GROWING POPULATION IN THE WEST
	1860	1890
Montana	N/A	142,924
Idaho	N/A	88,548
Wyoming	N/A	62,555
Colorado	34,277	413,249
New Mexico	93,516	160,282
Arizona	N/A	88,243
Utah	40,273	210,779
i Nevada	6,857	47,355
Washington	11,594	357,232
Oregon	52,465	317,704
California	379,994	1,213,398
Source: "United States Resident Population by State", http://lwd.dol.state.nj.us/ iabor/lpa/census/1990/poptrdl .htm
KEY QUESTIONS
Use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions: Cause ►►► How did railroad expansion shape population growth in the West?
Map the growth of the railroad network and the development of western towns and cities.
Analysis ►►► How did western agriculture develop during the late 1800s?
Map the importance of agricultural commodities produced in the West.
Response ►►► How did the federal government's presence manifest itself as settlers moved west?
Trace the spread of post offices.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
different groups of people, but across the West there were clashes between those who wanted to fence off private property and those who wanted open prairies.
At the heart of the battle in San M^iguel County were two different views of the nature of land ownership. The majority of JMexicanos—as people of Nlexican descent in New Mexico preferred to be called at the time—saw themselves as las masas de los hombres pobres (the masses of the poor). Their assumption was that any land that was not specifically part of the home or the irrigated farmland of one family was held in common—open grazing land that all could use. By the 1880s, however, Anglo-Americans with very different views of land ownership were arriving after the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railroad opened a line in 1879. Representatives of investors from the East Coast of the United States and from Britain, who could not imagine any alternative to private ownership of land, began buying up land and fencing off their property to create their own cattle ranches.
For some longtime residents, if the fences were threatening their way of life, the remedy was simple: get rid of the fences. When the ranchers did not comply with requests to take down their fences, a secret organization called the White Caps cut the fences, destroyed the posts, and opened the range again. In response to widespread fence cutting, the territorial governor requested federal troops. In spite of federal troops, most citizens of San Miguel County were sympathetic with the fence cutters. By the summer of 1890, San Miguel County’s dissidents were running for political office and soon controlled the balance of power between Republicans and Democrats in the territorial legislature. What had started as an outlaw movement had become part of the political process.
Latino resistance took different forms across the Southwest. In New Mexico, which retained a Mexicano majority well into the 1900s, it was possible for resistance to move into the political process and prevail. In Texas, where racial tensions were especially sharp and where the white majority grew rapidly, older Latino communities had fewer options. Police power rested with the Texas Rangers, who were seen by the Latino community as simply the force of the Anglo community. While the Rangers saw their opponents as outlaws, many in the Mexican-American community saw them as heroes. Perhaps most famous was the case of Gregorio Cortez (1875-1916) who came to Texas from the Mexican city of Matamoros. Cortez shot the sheriff of Manor, Texas, in 1901 when he tried to arrest Cortez for a crime he did not commit. After a long manhunt by the Texas Rangers, Cortez was arrested and sentenced to life in prison, but eventually pardoned by the governor of Texas. For generations, Latino songs and ballads—known as corridos—celebrated Cortez’s story within the Mexican-American community.
Mexican-American resistance also took other forms. Carlos Velasco immigrated from Sonora to Tucson, Arizona, and in 1878 launched El Fronterizo, one of many Spanish-language newspapers in the southwest. The paper continued to be published until 1914, successfully supporting the election of Mexican-Americans to local office and promoting Mexican customs, pride, and links across the international border. Farmers and Farm Towns
As the cattle industry was transitioning to a more settled ranching industry, farmers were also arriving on the Great Plains in numbers never before thought possible on the arid grasslands. Large numbers of them were responding to massive advertising by the railroads, who also owned much of the western lands. New techniques of farming enabled these farmers to cultivate areas where only buffalo herds had roamed only a short time before.
Those who began creating new homesteads and businesses as well as new lives in these lands of the West came from widely varying backgrounds. They included people of different faiths, Americans from eastern regions of the United States, immigrants from Europe and Mexico, former slaves, and Indians, among others.
Joseph Fish, a Mormon, lived a little upstream from Salt Lake City in the village of Parowan, Utah, where he worked as a miller and a tanner as well as farmed, exchanged work with neighbors, pulled sagebrush, built fences, and harvested wheat and oats to make his living.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the Wesi
IO
-"1
I
uj i
16.3
Gro and Ole Svendsen moved from Norway to Emmet County, Iowa, in 1863. Ole cut and sawed timber, broke ground, and harvested wheat. Gro made and sold butter and taught her children in Norwegian and English. Drops in agricultural prices and grasshoppers undermined their profits, but they carried on. For others, the challenges were too great. In the 1880s, a group of Ukrainian Jews created a utopian community in South Dakota, but the transition to the plains of South Dakota was too difficult and the community failed. Many other settlers and homesteaders also failed, and wagons traveling west to Kansas emblazoned with “Kansas or bust” met other returning wagons that said “Busted by gosh.” But people kept coming.
Thomas Johnson, a former slave from Kentucky, joined over 300 former slaves, known as Exodusters, in settling Nicodemus, Kansas, a town that was attracting people across the post-Reconstruction South with advertisements that said, “All Colored People that want to GO TO KANSAS, on September 5, 1877, Can do so for $5.00.” Initially, there was not much to this town. The wife of the first pastor said that she “began to cry” when she first saw it, but people stayed on, eventually building it up.
Rosie and Henry Ise arrived at a new homestead in Osborne County, Kansas, in 1873 with their team of horses and their small herd of cattle. The Ises were lucky. They were moving to an already established homestead that had a small cabin with a bed, a stove, and boxes for chairs. It also had a sod chicken house and a patch of corn, wheat, and oats already planted.
Mariano G. Samaniego moved north from the Mexican state of Sonora in the 1850s to Tucson, Arizona. He did not establish a homestead but opened a clothing store. Later, he earned a college degree from Saint Louis University and then expanded his business, supplying the Union army during the Civil War. By the 1880s, Samaniego shifted his focus to cattle ranching and was known as a respected leader of the Mexican community in Arizona.
Steven Arrow and Big Eagle took advantage of the Homestead Act and acquired their own homesteads in South Dakota, separate from the reservation land. They were an exception to

THINKING HISTORICALLY
Cutting Fences in New Mexico
As Los Gorras Blancas, or the White Caps, formed a secret militia and cut fences in an effort to retain the traditional communal grazing lands in the face of new development in San Miguel County, New Mexico, they also announced the reasons for their illegal activity. In March 1890, members of the organization rode through the town of Las Vegas, New Mexico, posting Nuestra Platforma, a platform announcing their goals that said:
Not wishing to be misunderstood, we hereby make this our declaration.
Our purpose is to protect the rights and interests of the people in general; especially those of the helpless classes.
We want the Las Vegas Grant settled to the benefit of all concerned, and this we hold is the entire community within the grant.
We want no "land grabbers" or obstructionists of any sort to interfere.
We will watch them.
There is a wide difference between New Mexico's "law" and "justice." And justice is God's law and that we must have at all hazards....Be fair and just and we are with you, do otherwise and take the consequences.
The White Caps, 1,500 Strong and Growing Daily
Source: Robert J. Rosenbaum, Mexicano Resistance in the Southwest (Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1998), p. 166.
Thinking Critically
1.	Compare and Contrast
How do the "rights and interests" described in this platform fit with the "rights and interests" of private property that many new arrivals brought with them to New Mexico?
2.	Historical Interpretation
How does a Mexican-American perspective change or complicate the traditional story of the history of the West in the post-Civil War era?
70 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Many different people filed homestead claims, including Lizzie Chrisman and her three sisters, who established a daim and a sod hut in Nebraska in 1887.

the American Indian experience, but a Sioux Falls merchant said of the Sioux Homesteaders that they “gave more indication of civilization and industry and a show of living like white people than the same number of Norwegian families located a few miles below.”
Fifteen percent of homestead claims were filed by single women. Married women could not file their own claim, being already part of a household. Elinore Pruitt Stewart wrote,
any woman who can stand her own company, can see the beauty of the sunset, love growing things, and is willing to put in as much time at careful labor as she does over washtubs...will have independence, plenty to eat all the time and a home of her own in the end.
The move by farm families into the West was relatively steady. The Homestead Act of 1862 made 160-acre tracts available to those who settled, and Congress later allowed larger homesteads in the more barren lands. The railroads advertised for farmers to settle on their lands. James J. Hill arranged for the settlement of over 200,000 farmers on lands the Great Northern Railroad owned in Montana alone. People who had moved west wrote to friends and families and invited them to join them. Some farm families moved often in search of better prospects. Other families put down deep multigenerational roots, providing stability to their communities.
Farms and homesteads dotted Minnesota, Nebraska, Kansas, and northwestern Iowa in the 1860s as well as California, Oregon, and Washington territory. Stage coach and wagon transport companies maintained links between rail centers and the isolated farms and towns. Throughout the 1870s and 1880s, settlements continued to increase. Between 1881 and 1885, 67,000 new settlers claimed homesteads in North and South Dakota in the “Great Dakota Land Boom.” In 1889, homesteaders rushed in to Oklahoma when the federal government declared a large swath of the former Indian Territory to be separate from any tribal reservation and opened it to white settlement.
As farmers and small town businesses filled the land, Indians felt the pressure on their reservations. Some sold land under the provisions of the Dawes Act, while the government sold off other previously tribal lands. In addition, cattle ranchers were forced to confine herds that had previously roamed freely. Long-standing Mexican communities in west Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California lost economic and political power to newcomers who had little respect for the older inhabitants of the region. Even so, the number of new farmers kept growing. In 1850, there were 1.5 million farms in the United States, just 119,000 of them west of the Mississippi River. By 1910, there were 6.4 million farms in the nation, and a very large number of them west of the Mississippi.
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West 471
Successfully growing crops in these new areas required discovering which ones thrived best. While corn grew well in the eastern United States, the hot temperatures and the lack of water made it hard to grow in much of the West. Mennonite settlers brought Russian hard winter wheat with them, and in Kansas and the surrounding “Golden Belt,” this wheat became the staple crop by the 1880s. In other areas, spring wheat did better while, in the high plains, sorghum crops resisted drought well. Experimentation, luck, and watching what worked for the neighbors all were essential to the success of farming in areas never before farmed.
Farming was not for the poorest people. It cost money to start a farm, even the most modest homestead. An 1862 farm publication estimated that the cost of starting a farm was $968. Homesteaders had to cover expenses in getting a family to a new place as well as in breaking the sod, clearing forest, building fences, buying farm implements, purchasing livestock and seed, and building a house. Nevertheless, there were thousands, eventually hundreds of thousands, of American families who saved or borrowed funds and began the farms that fed much of the world and settled much of the North American continent.
Mining and Miners
The Gold Rush to California was the first rush of people to seek wealth in the minerals of the West, but it was far from the only mineral rush. As early as 1859, Henry Comstock found silver along the Carson River in Nevada, and thousands of California miners rushed east into Nevada to seek new opportunities for wealth. Comstock himself sold his claim, but corporate interests made fortunes in Nevada. In 1874, thousands of miners, many fresh from the now played-out California goldfields and the Nevada silver mines, made their way to the Black Hills of South Dakota. The land was part of the Sioux reservation, but neither the U.S. Army nor the Sioux were able to stop many of the more than 15,000 prospectors who had come for gold. Some of them got rich, many of them died in the effort, and all of them helped launch some of the most intense of the Plains Indian Wars.
Mining and the quest for mineral wealth continued to lead to fortunes and to death in the West. In 1882, a poor Irish immigrant, Marcus Daly, persuaded California investors to back his claim to a silver mine near Butte, Montana. Very little silver was ever found at the Anaconda mine, but it turned out to be one of the richest deposits of copper in the world, making millions for Daley, his backers, and the Anaconda Copper Company. Others found mining wealth in gold, silver, copper, and lead mines in Idaho, Montana, Colorado, and as far away as Arizona and Alaska. The mineral wealth of the West seemed endless, and many from around the world sought to find it, though only a very few gained any real wealth.
Seemingly overnight, new towns emerged wherever there was mining for copper, silver, and gold, including Carson City, Nevada; Deadwood, South Dakota; and Anaconda, Montana. Like the cattle towns, these overwhelmingly male mining towns made up of transients could be violent places where the smallest disagreement could erupt into violence. In addition, ethnic rivalries often divided the miners. As in California’s gold fields, Chinese miners were soon driven out of most mining operations, in spite of the fact that Chinese immigrants were 10 percent of Montana’s population and 25 percent of Idaho’s in the 1870s. When not driven out, the Chinese were forced to take low-level jobs working water cannons or doing laundry for other miners. Miners of European origin also drove Mexican-American miners out of the fields.
Mining was male work and typically did not lead to a settled life. In 1860, the mining camps of Virginia City and Gold Hill, Nevada, reported a population of 2,300 men and 30 women. The towns also reflected the transient nature of the population. In 1879 Leadville, Colorado, had four banks, four churches, and 120 saloons, plus a fair share of brothels. While some mining towns later became important commercial centers, many soon became empty ghost towns once the mining played out.
Most prospectors sought wealth from their individual discoveries, but most of the money in mining was made by large corporations like the Anaconda Copper Company that could afford expensive mining equipment to extract deeply buried ore.
Work in the mines dangerous. Jobs were often divided by ethnicity, with Chinese and ^72 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914

Latino miners given the least-skilled and lowest paying jobs and miners from Europe getting the better paying positions. Nevertheless, with little attention to safety, all of the miners faced explosions, floods, cave-ins, and asphyxiation from poisonous gasses. Only the emergence of new unions among the miners began to address the dangers, if not the ethnic divides, in the 1890s (see Chapter 18).
Outlaws, Gunfighters, and Mythmakers—Legends of the Old West
The West of the late 1800s could be a very violent place. Contrary to Hollywood images, cowboys and Indians tended to keep their distance from each other. It was the army that fought the Indian wars, not the cowboys. But there was plenty of violence among whites. Ranch owners and land developers hired professional gunfighters to eliminate people they saw as troublemakers. Angry people on the margins, or those pushed to the margins of society, struck back violently, cutting fences in New Mexico or becoming outlaws and counting on the vast distances and easy anonymity of the West to protect them. Cowboys in town at the end of a long and dull cattle ride shot each other. Much of the violence was local and personal, some was between people wanting very different development in the region, especially between cattle ranchers and farmers, and some was also a carryover from the Civil War.
In Tombstone, Arizona, the local elite hired Wyatt Earp and his brothers, Virgil, Morgan, and Warren, along with Doc Holliday to make the town safe enough to encourage investors from California and the East Coast. The local elite and the Earp brothers all had strong Union Army and Republican Party connections. They were bothered by an outlaw group, ex-Confederate cattle rustlers led by the Clanton brothers and McLaury families. On October 26, 1881, at the O.K. Corral, the two sides met. Both Clanton brothers and one of the McLaurys were killed, and Tombstone became a more respectable place.
Another crime wave took place in Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. During the Civil War, Confederate raiders led by William Quantrill and including Jesse and Frank James terrorized Union supporters in Missouri and Kansas (see Chapter 15). Quantrill was killed before the war ended, but the James brothers continued a long reign as postwar outlaws, starting with a bank robbery at Liberty, Missouri, on February 13, 1866, and continuing in the new and lucrative arena of train robberies well into the 1880s. Many robbers like the James brothers found widespread, though quiet, support by farm families who would never attempt illegal behavior but who hated the railroads and the large commercial ranchers. These families privately cheered when those more powerful forces suffered losses at the hands of these outlaws, however violent and self-serving the particular rebels might be.
In New Mexico, the so-called Lincoln County War of 1878 pitted two groups of ranchers seeking to dominate the county. Both hired outlaws, one of whom was a young teenager named Henry McCarty who changed his name to William Bonney (a famous pirate) and who came to be known as “the Kid.” After the Lincoln County War ended, the hired outlaws drifted away. After trying unsuccessfully to find honest work, and after being promised a pardon but then having it revoked by New Mexico’s governor, “the Kid” turned to cattle rustling and robbery until he was shot by Lincoln County Sheriff Pat Garrett. But Billy the Kid, who was 21 when he died, had killed 10 people in his short and violent life. His legend grew far beyond his life as a whole publishing industry came to thrive on the retelling and expansion of his legend.
Stories of gunfighters like Billy the Kid and Wyatt Earp became legends of the American West, but the person who did the most to create the legend of the Wild West was a former army scout named William Cody who created his highly successful Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show in the 1880s. According to his autobiography, Cody was born in Iowa in 1846, but his family soon moved to Kansas where his father was killed by the “border ruffians” from Missouri in the battles of “Bleeding Kansas. Cody took a job herding cattle to support his family when he was 11 years old. During the Civil War, he was part of a local militia that protected the territory from attacks by Quantrill and the James brothers. Later, he hunted buffalo and served as a scout. On one occasion, Cody scouted for a party that included James Gorden Bennett of the New York Herald, one of
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West
Creede, Colorado, was a typical western mining town with quickly built buildings and a transient, virtually all-male population.
Annie Oakley (1860-1926) won fame for her shooting ability and often traveled with Buffalo Bill's Wild West show.
the nation’s great publicists. Bennett fictionalized Cody as the hero of one of the popular dime novels of the time, Buffalo Bill: the King of the Border Men, which gave Cody the chance to launch his “Wild West, Rocky Mountain, and Prairie Exhibition.”
Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show was everything eastern crowds wanted it to be. It included scenes from Indian battles, Indian dancing, stagecoach robberies, and always the shooting prowess of Annie Oakley, who epitomized the “good” frontier woman of wholesome character who could outshoot any man. In the 1880s, Sitting Bull himself traveled with the show, giving it an “authentic” aura for many who were anxious to see the leader who had defeated Custer in 1876.
The Wild West show was a long way from any true representation of the West. Although the Indians performed amazing feats of horseback riding, they nearly always ended up fulfilling stereotypical images in the minds of their white audiences. Similarly, while the true cowboys were an ethnically diverse lot—white, Mexican, Indian, and African-American—all of Cody’s cowboys were white. The U.S. Army units in the show were also white, in spite of the active role of African-American Buffalo soldiers in the West. Annie Oakley, who was an amazing shot with a rifle, lived in Ohio and never traveled further west except on tour with the show. Indians almost never had the battles with the cowboys that Cody portrayed; Indians fought with the army, and cowboys avoided those battles. However, Indians facing desperate poverty on the reservations found work in the shows that brought needed income, and they were allowed to dance traditional dances in the shows that were banned by federal authorities on the reservations.
Cody’s shows were performed all across the United States and in Europe, twice before Queen Victoria, and one of his riders performed in Outer Mongolia. Prince Albert I of Monaco came to Cody, Wyoming, to hunt with Buffalo Bill. When the show declined in popularity, Cody reinvented himself once again as an advisor to the new Hollywood studios—as did Wyatt Earp—on “realistic” ways to portray the old West in the new medium that was sweeping the nation. In the process, an image of the Wild West was formed that still persists.
Becoming States
For much of the 1880s, much of the western United States was organized into territories that were directly controlled by the federal government rather than as states that sent senators and representatives to Congress and voted in presidential elections.
^74 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
California was admitted, in 1850, just after the war with Nlexico and the discovery of gold. Minnesota was admitted in 1858 and Oregon in 1859. Kansas became a state in
1861,	Nevada in 1864, Nebraska in 1867, and Colorado in 1876. More than a decade later, in 1889 and 1890, six new western states were all admitted almost at once—the former territories of North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Washington, Idaho, and Wyoming. Utah was admitted in 1896, Oklahoma in 1907, and New Mexico and Arizona in 1912. Several unique issues account for the time lags.
In some cases, local elites found that they could prosper by controlling the federal appointments and federal funds in their territory while bypassing the democratic processes that statehood brought. Many in Congress also liked, and profited from, these arrangements. Ihe federal government owned much of the land in western states, and until the Indian wars came to an end, the U.S. Army was the chief protector of western citizens. Ihe U.S. Geological Survey and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers mapped and shaped the land of the West. Through the territorial stages and beyond, the federal government was a more important part of life in the West than in the East.
Some of the states posed unique issues. Long before it was admitted as a state, the territorial legislature in Wyoming granted the 1,200 women living in the territory the right to vote. When Wyoming became a state in 1890, it also became the first state to grant women the right to vote, allowing women in Wyoming to vote for president while their sisters elsewhere could not. Three years later, the State of Colorado granted women the right to vote. After that, campaigns for women’s votes stalled. A commitment to women’s rights was not universal in the West, but it was more popular there than elsewhere (see Map 16-4).
A more complicated issue arose in Utah and delayed statehood for years. The area around the Great Salt Lake had been settled by Mormon families in 1846 and 1847 when it was still part of Mexico (see Chapter 10). After the region became part of the United States in 1848, the federal government initially left the Mormons on their own, and Brigham Young served as territorial governor as well as spiritual leader. However, in the late 1850s, President Buchanan forced Young out of office and appointed a non-Mormon governor.
The issue for Buchanan was the Mormon commitment to plural marriage. Mormon men—but not Mormon women—were encouraged to take more than one spouse. The majority of Mormon men had only one wife, but a significant number had two, and Brigham Young himself had 27 wives and 56 children. As with more traditional families, some extended Mormon families succeeded quite well while others were torn. When questioned, the majority of Mormon women, including women whose husbands had other wives, defended their arrangement.
Plural marriage horrified most people in the rest of the United States, however. While Presidents Lincoln and Johnson had been too preoccupied with war and Reconstruction to worry much about the Mormons, Presidents Grant, Hayes, Garfield, and Arthur all promised to deal with the “Mormon Question.” As early as
1862,	Congress passed the Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act, making it a federal crime to take multiple wives, but Utah was far away and Mormon juries were not about to convict anyone accused of that crime.
In spite of all of the controversy and hostility generated by the issue of plural marriage, the Mormon community prospered. By the 1860s, there were enough people living in Utah Territory to qualify for statehood. By 1870, the population stood at 87,000. Unlike other parts of the West, where white men far outnumbered white women, Utah had a balanced gender ratio. Women and men prospered in a community of strict morality and hard work, including work for women outside of the household. Women ran their own industries, cooperative stores, as well as relief societies and charities.
The rest of the United States remained dissatisfied with Utah’s practices, however, and eventually, the Mormon leadership decided that statehood was more important than maintaining plural marriage. In 1890, the Mormon Church announced the end of plural marriage, and although there were those who continued to practice it, the majority of members went along with the decision. With that key issue resolved, Utah
16.1
IO
163
Chapter 16 Conflict in the We:
was admitted as a state in 1896. One of the first moves by the new state legislature was to, again, give women the right to vote and hold office, making Utah the third state, after Wyoming and Colorado, to do so.
Issues of race delayed the admission of the last three western states. Oklahoma had been established as Indian Territory when Andrew Jackson’s Indian removal policies forced some northern tribes and the five southeastern tribes to move there. By the late 1800s, the tribes had put down roots, developed new communities, and were thriving. Other western tribes had also been forced to settle in Indian Territory. Nevertheless, the Dawes Act and other federal policies opened much of the western part of the territory to white settlement. In 1905, representatives of the tribes proposed establishing two separate states—Sequoyah in the eastern portion would be made up of the Indian Reservations. Oklahoma in the west would be made up of the white areas. Indiana Senator Albert J. Beveridge, Chair of the Senate Committee on Territories wanted to have just one territory dominated by “Americans,” by which he did not mean Indians, and President Theodore Roosevelt agreed. Oklahoma was admitted in 1907 as a single state.
The Territory of New Mexico initially included all of Arizona and New Mexico. The population quickly reached the level required for statehood but, unlike the other areas acquired from Mexico, especially Texas and California, the majority of the people living
NUMBER OF CHILDREN
(per woman) MAP 16-4 Early States Granting Women Suffrage. Before 1920, a number of states, especially in the West, granted women the right to vote as indicated on this map.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
in New Mexico Territory were of Mexican descent. In spite of the fact that they were now U.S. citizens, Congress was not prepared to admit a self-governing state with a Mexican-American majority. In 1902, Senator Beveridge proposed uniting them again and admitting them as a single state since that would ensure a larger “American” (or non-Mexican) population, but that proposal failed. President William Howard Taft signed legislation in 1912 admitting New Mexico and Arizona as the 47th and 48th states of the Union.
Well before New Mexico and Arizona became states, the political, economic, and cultural shape of the vast region known as the West was settled. The original inhabitants who had fought with each other and with whites and had hunted buffalo across the plains or lived comfortably on the rich resources of the Pacific Coast were moved to distant reservations where they were alternatively ignored and challenged by federal authorities while building new cultures for themselves and the surrounding communities. By 1900, much of the West was divided into settled communities of farms, large and small, and growing towns connected by railroads. There was still plenty of desolate empty country to be found, but the West of the 1800s was a receding memory.
Quick Review What were the major concerns involved in admitting new states in the West? How were these issues similar to or different from those involved in admitting states in the East?
CONCLUSION
Ihe American West changed dramatically between 1865 and 1890. In the midst of the Civil War, Abraham Lincoln had urged tribal leaders to adopt the “peaceful ways of the white people,” without noticing the irony of such a plea in the midst of the Civil War. Ihe end of the Civil War brought two of the most violent decades in the West as units of the U.S. Army fought with various tribes trying to force the Native Americans to give up their traditional hunting and nomadic ways to settle on reservations. By the 1890s, conflict between whites and Indian tribes was over as tribes were defeated and moved into ever-shrinking reservations. While the impacts of white settlement and the Civil War on American Indians varied from tribe to tribe, in the long run, they were a disaster.
After the Civil War, white ranchers, farmers, and miners built new settlements across the West. What began as great cattle ranches were replaced by smaller farms producing beef and wheat for national and world markets. Ihe agricultural developments of the post-Civil War era depended on new technologies—most importantly, railroads that brought supplies to isolated farmers and shipped their products to world markets. What had once been isolated regional economies quickly became part of a national and international commercial network because of railroads, and the United States was connected to the world as never before. As more and more people settled the West, access to vast regions for grazing cattle became limited and tensions began to mount. Still, the West was largely rural, and disputes were often settled by hiring outlaws rather than by more traditional means. Farmers came to the West for many reasons, including the desire for land, the search for better economic opportunities than were available in the East, and a longing for adventure. Although most farmers established homesteads in hopes of establishing permanent roots, mining towns sprang up around impermanent mines, and they were often violent places.
Once a distant frontier, by 1890, the American West was becoming part of the nation’s cultural, economic, and political networks and by 1912 the last of the western territories had become a state. The large areas that had been governed as territories were not settled and populated enough to be considered as states, but some of these areas posed unique issues. However, despite debates over economic issues, voting rights of women, concern about the plural marriage of Mormon communities, and the racial diversity of parts of the Southwest, all of the once isolated territory of the American West had been divided into new states that were admitted to the Union by 1912.
CHAPTER
How do the typical depictions of the American West in the late 1800s differ from
the realities of life in the region?
Chapter 16 Conflict in the West
Chapter 16 Chapter Review
16.1
!

THE TRIBES OF THE WEST AND THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
Explain western development from an Indian perspective and the way Indian and white cultures shaped each other.
Review Questions
1.	Cause and Effect
What new opportunities did the Civil War create for the Comanche people?
2.	Contextualization
What does the Ghost Dance phenomenon tell us about how the Sioux of the 1890s saw their recent history?
3.	Historical Interpretation
Why did the U.S. government come to believe that it needed new approaches to Indian policy in the 1870s and 1880s? Whose interests did the new policies serve?
THE IMPACT OF THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROAD,
1869 Analyze the building of transcontinental railroads and its impact on the nation, especially the West.
16.2
16.3
5.	Craft an Argument
What factors might explain the widespread support for a transcontinental railroad in the 1850s and 1860s?
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WEST__________________________
Analyze how indigenous people, ranchers, farmers, miners, outlaws, politicians, and mythmakers shaped the West and our understanding of its history.
Review Questions
6.	Cause and Effect
What factors contributed to the boom in cattle ranching in the second half of the 1800s?
7.	Contextualization
What motives brought white farmers to the West in the decades following the Civil War?
8.	Historical Interpretation
How did issues of race and gender impact the admission of western states into the Union?
Review Questions
4.	Historical Interpretation
How did railroads contribute to the growth of a national economy?
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
If anything symbolized the new industrial might that began to characterize the United States in the Gilded Age, it was the production of steel at one of Andrew Carnegie's plants.
On May 10, 1876, Ulysses S. Grant, then in his 8th year as president, traveled to Philadelphia to open the Centennial International Exhibition of Industry. The event celebrated the 100th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence with a massive show of the nation’s progress in science, technology, and industry. The exhibition covered 285 acres on the banks of Philadelphia’s Schuylkill River and included pavilions from each state and from many foreign countries. Among them, Colorado and Kansas displayed corn 20 feet high, and Germany displayed a giant artillery piece from the Krupp works. Between the pavilions were refreshment stands selling popcorn, waffles, soda water, root beer, and German lager bier as well as a fountain built by the Sons of Temperance, which was serving ice water. The focus was on the great mechanical achievements of the United States, symbolized by the giant Corliss steam engine that provided power for all the exhibits in Machinery Hall and that seemed to be without vibration or noise (because its boiler was outside the building) as well as by the many mowers, reapers, sewing machines, typewriters, fans for ventilating mines, and the Pullman sleeping cars. Most of all, the fair told the world that the United States had arrived as a manufacturing and technological giant.
The event represented a cross-section of the nation in 1876, both as it was and as it wanted to be, filled with new inventions, including Alexander Graham Bell’s new telephone, which Bell demonstrated to
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Understand how the United States became an industrial giant, at what cost, and with what impact on its diverse peoples and cultures.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
TECHNOLOGY CHANGES THE NATION
Explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
CORPORATIONS AND MONOPOLIES
Analyze the role of the new giant corporations in American life.
LIVES OF THE MIDDLE CLASS IN THE GILDED AGE
Analyze daily life, popular ideas, and political direction for the middle class during the Gilded Age.
IMMIGRATION
Explain the reasons immigrants came to the United States in such large numbers during the Gilded Age and what their experience was.
Chanter 17 The Gilded Aqe: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order
17.1
17 J
173
17.4
Significant Dates
1859 Edwin Drake discovers oil in Titusville, Pennsylvania
1870	Standard Oil Company launched by John D. Rockefeller and Henry M. Flagler
1871	Thomas Edison demonstrates Universal Stock Printer
Treaty of Washington settles U.S.-Canadian border and claims between United States and Britain
1873	Panic of 1873—Economic panic and
depression
Senate rejects United States acquisition of Dominican Republic
1875	Dwight L. Moody launches religious revivals
1876	Alexander Graham Bell patents the telephone
Thomas Edison establishes research laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey
President Grant opens Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition
1877	Cornelius Vanderbilt, richest man in America, dies in New York City
1878	Edison demonstrates new phonograph
1879	Edison's first successful incandescent lamp burns for 16 hours on November 17
1882	Edison Illuminating Company lights
southern Manhattan Chinese Exclusion Act
1886/1888 George Westinghouse and Nikola Tesla discover alternating current to transmit electricity
1887	First Electronic Trolley cars built
1890	Greatly increased immigration from
Eastern Europe and Asia begins
1892	Ellis Island immigration station opens in New York Harbor
1893	Panic of 1893—Major U.S. depression 1896 Edison demonstrates first moving pictures
U.S.
Steel becomes the largest corporation in history 1902	Victor Talking Machine Company begins mass producing recording disks
1903	Wright Brothers make first flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina
1913 Henry Ford's moving assembly line begins operation at Highland Park, Michigan
an appreciative audience that included the Emperor of Brazil. It was a fitting opening to an era in which business, manufacturing, and technology would dominate the nation’s political, economic, and cultural life, bringing prosperity and power that was previously unimagined. It would also hring clashes between those who benefited and those who did not, which frightened many and nearly tore the nation apart. This chapter explores how the nation came to be that giant, at what cost to its people and the world, and with what results in the culture—or, rather, the many different cultures—of the country.
TECHNOLOGY CHANGES THE NATION
17.1
Explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact.
Alexander Graham Bell saw himself as a teacher more than an inventor. While teaching deaf students at Boston University, Bell sought new ways to help deaf people hear. In July 1874, he discovered that if a person were to speak into a vibrating set of reeds, it created a fluctuating current that could, at the other end of an electronic wire, be turned back into the same sound through another set of tuned reeds. He patented his new invention in March 1876 and demonstrated it first by calling his assistant Thomas Watson from the next room. Later, he showed it at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and then at the World’s Fair. While Bell returned to teaching, others organized the Bell Telephone Company. By 1880, there were 30,000 telephone subscribers. By 1900, the number had grown to 1.3 million, and by 1920, to 13 million. In four decades, Bells experiment had become a necessity of modern life. For most Americans, the telephone replaced the telegraph, developed by Samuel F. B. Morse from earlier inventions in 1835. By the 1840s, telegraphs were relaying messages and news in Morse code, consisting of dot and dash signals, over miles of telegraph wires—215,000 miles of wires by 1900. But the telephone quickly made the telegraph outdated.
Before Bell gained fame for his telephone, Thomas Edison was already on his way to being known as the greatest inventor of the era. Edison was born in Milan, Ohio, in 1847, the same year as Bell. At 16, with little formal schooling, he became a telegraph transmitter. Several people in the telegraph industry were trying to design what they called a “diplex,” a way to send two messages—one in each direction—on the same telegraph wire at the same time. In 1873, Edison produced both a diplex and a quadruplex that could send two messages simultaneously each way on a single wire, greatly increasing the value of every telegraph line in the nation and securing Edison’s fame and fortune. While he was toying with that invention, Edison had also invented the Edison Universal Stock Printer in 1871, a greatly improved version of the stock ticker tape machine.
In 1876, Edison established an independent research laboratory at Menlo Park, New Jersey. The many employees there were made to understand that they worked only at Edison’s direction and he got all of the credit. Eventually, he had 1,000 patents to his name, thus becoming the most productive American inventor of all time. He tinkered with ways to record a human voice and music. On April 18, 1878, he demonstrated his new phonograph at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, DC and, later that night, at a midnight show at the White House.
Edison’s most important invention was the electric light bulb. In the 1870s, large meeting halls were lit by arc lamps, and gas lights were popular in many places. The rest of the nation—city as well as country—depended on kerosene lamps or candles when the sun went down. The electric light bulb changed things across the country. Given Edison’s fame, he was able to assemble a consortium of financiers, led by J. Pierpont Morgan, to support his research. After toying with different options, the Edison labs created a bulb that lit a room for 16 hours on November 17,1879. Almost immediately, everyone wanted electric lights, and Edison wanted everyone to have Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
ki
80
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World
them. He made London, Paris, and New York the priority cities because he knew that what happened in those places would quickly be reported elsewhere. Within 2 years, all three cities had buildings lit by electric lights. On September 4, 1882, Edison pulled the switch that lit a number of buildings in southern Manhattan, including the House of Morgan, the New York Stock Exchange, and the headquarters of the New York Times and New York Herald.
The inventions just kept coming. George Westinghouse and Nikola Tesla found that alternating current was a much more efficient way to transmit electricity than the direct current that Edison used. Edison was initially skeptical, but by the 1890s, alternating current produced at generating plants from New York to California was powering much of the nation. Frank J. Sprague introduced the first electric streetcars in Richmond, Virginia, in 1888, and these cars, which were cheaper and cleaner and safer than horse-drawn or steam cars, caught on quickly.
In 1892, the General Edison Electric Company merged with a rival to create General Electric, the company that not only produced light bulbs but also all things electric. By 1896, using film developed by George Eastman of Rochester, New York,
Edison moved from small-scale to large-screen moving pictures, and in 1902, the Victor Talking Machine Company began mass-producing recording disks and players. The country was radically different because of Edison’s work and that of other prolific inventors who gave the country elevators invented by Elisha G. Otis, machine tools from Pratt and Whitney, steam boilers from Babcock and Wilcox, newspaper linotype compositors, and typewriters. A total of 440,000 patents issued between 1860 and 1890 transformed modern life.
In the 1890s, a number of independent manufacturers began experimenting with gasoline-powered vehicles, putting a gasoline engine on bicycles or carriages, which led to automobiles. Although by 1899 only 2,500 automobiles were produced per year, many were predicting that the new vehicles would replace horse-drawn carriages.
They were right. By 1916, 1 million automobiles were produced in the United States, which created massive change as work with horses declined and a new set of jobs in the automobile industry began as more and more Americans experienced the freedom that an automobile gave them.
The key to the vastly expanded production of automobiles was the vehicle itself, which was relatively simple, given other inventions that existed. Rather, expanded production was possible only after inventing a way to produce large numbers of cars at low cost. The genius who revolutionized the production of automobiles was Henry Ford. Ford, a former machinist, built his first automobile in 1896 after many others had done so, but it was his invention of the assembly line that made possible the mass-production of cars at reasonable costs. Ford took the idea of interchangeable parts, first developed for guns by Eli Whitney, and applied it to cars. Then he created a process whereby those parts could be assembled in a routinized fashion that greatly speeded production, thus lowering cost, even if it made the role of most workers extremely boring.
Ford opened a plant for the production of the Model T Ford in Highland Park,
Michigan, in 1910 and added a moving assembly line in 1913. Each worker was assigned one small task to be repeated over and over. As Ford described it, “Every piece of work in the shop moves. There is no lifting or trucking of anything other than materials.” Worker after worker did his assigned task over and over again. At the end of the process, a fully assembled Model T emerged from the assembly line. Ford paid his workers well. He had to. They found the work mind numbing, but valued the pay—high enough that they, too, could afford their own Model T. He transformed an industry, bringing the cost of an automobile to within the reach of many Americans and spawning a whole set of new industries from highway construction to automobile repairs. The success of the automobile dramatically expanded the nation s need for oil, now refined into gasoline to power the rapidly growing numbers of vehicles (see Table 17-1).
