Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 537
Social Darwinism
The application of Charles Darwin's theory of biological evolution to society, holding that the fittest and the wealthiest should thrive and lead, the weak and the poor "deserve" their fate, and government action is unable to alter this "natural" process.
The Professors
John Dewey is best remembered for his educational ideas, but his goal was a wider philosophical response to industrialism. Dewey was born in 1859 in a small town in Vermont, studied philosophy at Johns Hopkins University, and taught at the University of Michigan. In 1894, Dewey was invited to the new University of Chicago. Dewey accepted the offer with enthusiasm. Chicago in the 1890s was the center of social reform in which Dewey and his wife Alice Chapman Dewey were deeply interested. When it came time to make the move, however, Dewey had a hard time getting to Chicago.
When Dewey set out for Chicago in July 1894, most of the nation’s rail lines were shut down because of the Pullman strike. He found transit on a Michigan Central train that did not use Pullman cars. Traveling in the midst of a nationwide strike was informative to the young philosophy professor. He spoke with one of the American Railway Union organizers and wrote to his wife that “my nerves were more thrilled than they had been for years.” He wondered “if I had better resign my job teaching & follow him round till I got into life.” Dewey was considerably less impressed by another passenger who was “voluble on the outrage” of the strike because it was preventing him from getting home for dinner. For Dewey, the focus was on higher considerations.
Young intellectuals like Dewey were then challenging the dominant economic theory of the time, “Social Darwinism.” The foremost American exponent of Social Darwinism, the economist William Graham Sumner, opposed what he called “the absurd effort to make the world over.” For Sumner, Charles Darwin’s description of biological evolution showed that the fittest of each species survive and thus shape the future. So, Sumner argued, in the social order, the fittest were rightfully the owners and the dominant class of society. Those less fit are condemned by their natural “un-fitness” to be laborers and employees. Any interference with the system, Sumner argued, would destabilize the economy and weaken the nation. Herbert Spencer, a British writer, proposed similar ideas, coining the phrase “survival of the fittest.” He, too, had a large following in the United States, especially among the wealthy.
Dewey saw the ideas of Spencer and Sumner as easy but unethical justifications for privilege. Instead, Dewey believed that wise people could and should intervene in the economy to make it more just. His thinking was shared by a generation of philosophers, including William James, Charles S. Peirce, and future Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, who in the 1880s and 1890s doubted all ideological certainties and certainly did not want to see Social Darwinism become the dominant mindset in society.
Another young scholar, Richard Ely at Johns Hopkins University, also attacked the Social Darwinists. Ely had visited the town of Pullman before the strike and noticed that workers would not talk to him, fearing that he was a spy. He called the town’s culture “benevolent, well-wishing feudalism.” As a counter to Social Darwinism, Ely was developing a very different economic theory that allowed for—indeed called for— government to intervene directly in the economic affairs of the country.
While Dewey focused on philosophy and Ely on economics, Albion Small was helping to build the new academic discipline of sociology. For Small, sociologists did not simply study society; they meant to reform it. In 1896, Small sought to help define his field when he wrote in the new American Journal of Sociology that “action, not speculation, is the supreme teacher.” Dewey, Ely, and Small were all part of a generation of academics who shared the goal of changing society.
The Muckraking Journalists
Although newspapers had been important in the United States since well before the American Revolution, newspapers changed significantly in the late 1800s. When Joseph Pulitzer bought the New York Evening World in 1887, he made it the largest circulation paper in the country with several innovations—banner headlines, comic strips, and investigative journalism. The World did an expose of the speculative adventures of the managers of the Equitable Life Assurance Society, which the paper said were
|538 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
“gambling with the peoples money. Public anger over this news of the insurance industry’s excesses led to the election of a reforming Republican, Charles Evans Hughes, as governor of New York in 1906 and to new regulations on the insurance industry. In addition, the huge response to the expose made the World a very successful paper.
Almost a decade later, William Randolph Hearst, who had used the Pulitzer formula for his San Francisco Examiner exposes of the Southern Pacific Railroad, purchased the New York Morning Journal to compete directly with Pulitzer. Hearst hired some of the country’s best reporters, Edward Markham, Ambrose Bierce, and Winifred Black, and published his own exposes of New York City corruption. Many other newspapers began to imitate Pulitzer and Hearst.
The trend toward investigative reporting to expose misconduct of important people or organizations was emerging even before Pulitzer and Hearst took advantage of it. Henry Demarest Lloyd, who wrote for Chicago newspapers, became one of the first of the so-called muckraking journalists. The term muckraking referred to the job of raking through filth. Muckraking journalists saw it as their duty to expose the filth of corruption. Not everyone liked the new investigative journalism, and those who objected included more than just those being investigated. President Theodore Roosevelt thought the journalists described problems but failed to offer solutions. It was Roosevelt who coined the term muckrakers. He said the journalists were simply raking up the muck from the bottom of society’s pond, and the name muckraker stuck. For many, however, it became a term of respect.
Early in his career, Lloyd covered the 1877 railroad strike. He wrote that if something did not happen to improve the lot of the country’s workers, “the country will drift into a convulsion as much greater than the convulsion that wrecked the Roman Empire.” Lloyd’s 1881 expose of Standard Oil Company and his 1894 book, Wealth Against Commonwealth, denounced the monopolies as a threat to the welfare of everyday people.
Hearst also launched Cosmopolitan magazine as a vehicle for investigative journalism. In 1893, S. S. McClure launched McClure's Magazine, which until 1926 was the
muckraking journalists
Journalism exposing economic, social, and political evils, so named by Theodore Roosevelt for its "raking the muck"from the bottom of American society.
The Jungle, by muckraking journalist Upton Sinclair, exposed the inhumane and unhealthy conditions of meat processing in Chicago. One result was typical of progressive legislation designed to improve peop es lives, the Pure Food and Drug Act, which regulated the meatpacking industry.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 539
leader in the investigative field. Investigative journalists writing with the conviction that if people knew more of what was wrong in society they would act to change it-played a key role in the Progressive movement.
Ihe January 1903 issue of McClure's included articles by Ida M. Tarbell as part of her continuing analysis of John D. Rockefeller and the Standard Oil Company, later published as The History of the Standard Oil Company in 1904, Ray Stannard Baker s report of visiting striking coal miners and their families; and the report by Lincoln Steffens on “Ihe Shame of Minneapolis” about the trial of the infamous four-term mayor of Minneapolis who got rich from payments from opium joints, unlicensed saloons known as “blind pigs,” and “disorderly houses of prostitution. Issue after issue of McClure's, Cosmopolitan, and daily newspapers were forcing cities to clean up corruption, compelling sometimes reluctant legislators to enact new restrictions on monopolies, and helping political reformers gain office.
In 1906, a young reporter named Upton Sinclair took a job in Chicago’s slaughterhouses to report, from the inside, on the meatpacking industry. He found a world where workers suffered terrible injury, animals suffered inhumane treatment, and unsanitary conditions poisoned the meat consumed by Americans. When Sinclair’s expose, The Jungle, was published in 1906, the public response was immediate. Consumption of meat fell precipitously, and within months, Congress passed the Federal Meat Inspection Act and the Pure Food and Drug Act regulating the meat industry as well as the food and drug industries. While Sinclair’s main goal had been to draw attention to inhumane working conditions, the primary result of his efforts was sanitary regulation of meatpacking plants. As Sinclair reflected years later, “I aimed at the public’s heart and by accident I hit it in the stomach.” Nevertheless, the passage of reform legislation within months of a Sinclair’s book showed the power of such reporting and, at the same time, raised journalism to new heights as a respectable profession.
Quick Review Which was more important to launching the Progressive movement: the theory behind it or the identification of specific problems? Why?
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE CITIES
Analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
The United States grew from a little under 40 million people in 1870 to just over 75 million people in 1900 (for comparison, the 2010 census showed the United States at over 300 million people). Perhaps one-third of the growth between 1870 and 1910 was due to immigration and two-thirds to a high-birth rate. While the population almost doubled, it also became concentrated in cities. Many of the nations cities were much larger and more densely populated in 1900 than they had been in 1870, when the majority of people still lived on farms and in rural communities. In 1870, the United States had only seven cities with over 250,000 people and none yet held a million people. Thirty years later, three cities had passed the 1 million mark—New York with 3.4 million, Chicago with 1.7 million, and Philadelphia with 1.3 million. Ihere were also dozens of large cities scattered among most of the states and territories of the union. Americans were adjusting to urban life, and the adjustment was not always easy.
The Rise of Machine Politics and the Progressive Response
As cities grew, a new kind of urban politics took root in the United States, shaped by the fact that cities were the major points of entry for new immigrants to the nation. Many immigrants desperately needed services, especially help with a job. Some took quickly to city political life, finding in politics a way to gain social respectability.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Nowhere was the mix of urban growth, immigration, and the need for new services greater than in New York City. Within that mix in New York, a new kind of political organization, the political machine, was created. In political machines, constituents supported a candidate in return for anticipated favors, which would be repaid when that candidate was elected. New Yorks Democratic political machine was known as Tammany Hall, named for the building where it first met. Tammany effectively ruled New York for most of the years from the 1850s to the 1930s. Many other urban political machines were often associated with Irish political leaders, but Tammany predated the Irish influence. In fact, gaining access to Tammany was part of the Irish rise to power in New York City.
The most famous, or infamous, of early Tammany bosses was William M. (Boss) Tweed, who led Tammany in the 1860s and 1870s. Tweed was a Protestant of English background. After holding the office of alderman (city council member) and then being elected to Congress, Tweed turned to where he saw the real power, in Tammany.
In 1863 at the age of 40, Tweed became the chief of Tammany. He made sure one of his close allies, Abraham Oakley, was elected mayor while he stayed in the background and kept control of the political process. Tweed became immensely wealthy as he and his Tammany associates benefited from—some said stole from—development projects like the Tweed Courthouse in lower Manhattan (now the home of the city’s school department) and Riverside Park, built over the New York Central Railroad tracks— beautiful municipal improvements that provided jobs but cost many times what they should have, with large kickbacks going to the chosen developers and to Tweed himself.
Tweed and the New York political bosses who came after him robbed the city shamelessly, by one estimate taking 45 million dollars (1 billion in current dollars). At the same time, the political machine made sure that the city’s poor—or more specifically, those among the city’s poor who supported them on election day—got jobs when they needed them. When necessary, Tammany created more jobs than the city needed
Tammany Hall
New York City's Democratic Party organization, dating from well before the Civil War, that evolved into a powerful political machine after 1860, using patronage and bribes to maintain control of the city administration.
Political cartoons like this one showing a corrupt political boss handing out special privileges and demanding
votes in return, did much to turn public opinion against machine rule in politics.	Pnlitir.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 5-

to be sure that every loyal voter got one, even if that meant that the city had 20 inspectors for its four water pumps and Central and Riverside parks were kept immaculate by an impressively large number of park workers. Tammany and other political machines could also be counted on for more direct aid when it was needed a handout to tide a family over a rough spot, a basket of food for the holidays, someone to show up at court and indicate to the judge or district attorney when charges should be dropped.
Tweed’s corruption was attacked by the cartoonist Thomas Nast and eventually provoked a public backlash. Tweed was arrested, convicted of theft, and died in jail in 1878. Some of his collaborators fled the country. But Tammany survived, and the new leader, John (Honest John) Kelly was the first of a long line of Irish politicians to direct Tammany. Kelly avoided the kind of theft that led to Tweed s downfall. But he did ensure that a tightly organized political machine maintained close links to immigrant communities and Catholic parishes, as well as local and district bosses. Kelly controlled the city’s 40,000 jobs and made sure that loyal Tammany supporters-those who remembered to vote the Tammany ticket on election day—got those jobs.
One of Tammany’s district leaders, George Washington Plunkitt, was also a state senator. In 1905, Plunkitt described how New York politics worked. He said that reformers failed to draw “the distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft. There’s all the difference in the world between the two.” Plunkitt would have nothing to do with “dishonest graft—blackmailin’ gamblers, saloon-keepers, disorderly people, etc.” But there was another way, he said, “There’s honest graft, and I’m an example of how it works. I might sum up the whole thing by sayin’: T seen my opportunities and I took em.”’ He explained, “Well, I’m tipped off, say, that they’re going to lay out a new park at a certain place... .1 go to that place, and I buy up all the land I can in the neighborhood.... ain’t it perfectly honest to charge a good price and make a profit on my investment and foresight?” It was an arrangement that Plunkitt saw no reason to hide. Reformers might not have liked it, but that was how cities worked in Plunkitt’s day.
New York was far from alone in the rise of machine politics that was often Irish dominated. Most large cities had something similar. Politics in Boston was played at the neighborhood level, where a number of legendary figures—Patrick J. Kennedy in East Boston, John F. (Honey Fitz) Fitzgerald in the North End, P.J. Maguire and later James Michael Curley in Roxbury, and most powerful of all Martin Lomasney in the West End—each ruled their neighborhood. In 1905, Fitzgerald won election as mayor. He served two terms and was succeeded by his arch-rival James M. Curley, who dominated Boston politics for the next half century. Fitzgerald’s favorite daughter, Rose, married Patrick Kennedy’s son Joseph, and their son, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, became the first Irish Catholic elected president.
While the political machines met real needs for their poor and working-class constituents (and along the way made a few of their leaders very wealthy), the closed-door deals, the graft—“honest” or “dishonest”—and the political favoritism dismayed many. The political machines greatly increased the cost of municipal government. They also shut many out of office, especially the children and grandchildren of the native-born elite who thought it was their duty and destiny to rule. A new generation of political reformers began challenging the political machines, making municipal reform an important element in the progressive agenda.
The Progressive Challenge to City and State Government
Progressive reformers believed that the country’s political and economic systems could be fixed if honest people of good will put their minds to it. They had little interest in radical reforms like socialism and little sympathy for the old-line politicians like Boston’s Martin Lomasney. They were what they said they were, reformers, trying to reform current structures of government.
In their campaigns for efficient urban management, progressive reformers sometimes came across as cold and heartless to residents who preferred the
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
542
American Voices
Lincoln Steffens, “Boston—1915,” 1908
Lincoln Steffens, one of the leading "muckraking" journalists, was invited to support a reform effort in Boston—called Boston 1915—by local businessmen in 1908. Boston taught Steffens some important lessons about not only the role of political machines but also the place of reformers like himself in the life of the urban poor.
My sponsor, E. A. Filene, called together a group of earnest, representative men, some of them reformers, not all...I [asked them], Who was the worst, the most impossible, man in Boston?
"Martin Lomasney," they said, all in quick agreement. A politician he was....and the next morning early I took my little dog, Mickey Sweeney, and went over in the bad wards where Martin Lomasney was the boss....
"Who do you want?" he demanded.
"Martin Lomasney."
"That's me," he said. "Who are you?"
I told him. "Sure," he said. "I've read your stuff. What do you want?"...
"The reformers sent me to you,"..."I asked them who was the worst man in town, and they named you. So I've come to get the low-down on things, and—will you give it to me?"..
"You must want something," Martin grumbled at me....
"Yes," I said. "Police graft. What do you do about the petty
crooks?"
He was cross, or he pretended to be. "What do you mean by petty crooks?"
"Oh, you know, the dips, the burglars and thieves, the regular professional crooks that we honest grafters call criminals."
"And what do you mean by what I do about them?"
"Well, you go to the front for them, don't you? See the dis-
trict attorney or a judge or the cops—you get them off, don't you?"
"Yes, I do," he said, dropping his feet and facing me with three fingers thrust under my nose. "Three times."
I laughed."Ah, now, don't you sometimes do it four times?" He was defying me. "Seven times? Martin, don't you even
get'em off seventy times seven times?"
"Yes, I do," he burst. "I never quit some of'em, not the way you do."
"Of course," I said. "You stick, but tell me, how do you justify it to yourself, saving these hopeless crooks over and over and over again when you know they'll come back and do it over and over and over again!"
I did not expect him to answer this question. It was more of an exclamation on my part, but he did answer it; inarticulate people can sometimes express themselves.
"I think," said Martin Lomasney, "that there's got to be in every ward somebody that any bloke can come to—no matter what he's done—and get help. Help, you understand; none of your law and your justice, but help."
That hit me hard, and we got no further that day.... They provided help and counsel and a hiding-place in emergencies for friendless men, women, and children who were in dire need, who were in guilty need, with the mob of justice after them. And, as I sat there and thought I saw that if we were to build up in Boston an organization to replace the political machine and so win the town the loyalty that now went to the boss and his party, we must provide for that service.
Source: Lincoln Steffens, The Autobiography of Lincoln Steffens (New York: The Literary Guild, 1931), pp. 612-618.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What did Lincoln Steffens, and the men who invited him to Boston, think about the way that Martin Lomasney ran his ward in Boston? What did Lomasney think of the reformers?
2.	Historical Interpretation
How did Lomasney justify his politics? What do his justifications suggest about the challenges faced by the reformers who hoped to supplant him?
face-to-face dealings of old-style political bosses. Moreover, in their desire to cut costs, some reformers attacked services that others thought essential. Progressive reform was also seen—sometimes accurately—as an effort by an older Protestant and native-born elite to reclaim power from more recent immigrant groups, especially the Irish, who had built up their own political organizations.
Nevertheless, candidates committed to cleaning up urban corruption and providing more efficient urban services came to power in a number of cities. Progressive reform cut across the political parties. Republicans and Democrats alike included both reformers and those who resisted reform.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics
initiative
Procedure by which citizens can introduce a subject for legislation, usually through a petition signed by a specific number of voters.
referendum
Submission of a law, proposed or already in effect, to a direct popular vote for approval or rejection.
recall
The process of removing an official from office by popular vote, usually after using petitions to call for such a vote.
Grover Cleveland was elected mayor of Buffalo, New York, as a Democrat in 1881 with a promise to clean up the municipal corruption. Cleveland established a reputation for honesty, especially after he rejected a street-cleaning contract approved by the city council as a “bare-faced, impudent, and shameless scheme.” Cleveland’s honesty led to his election as a reform governor of New York and, only 2 years later, to the presidency and the White House.
Hazen S. Pingree was elected mayor of Detroit, Michigan, as a Republican reformer. Born in Maine in 1840, Pingree served in the Union army, then moved to Detroit where he went to work in a shoe factory, and by the 1880s, owned one of the largest shoe manufacturers in the Midwest. In 1889, Republican business leaders, determined to oust Detroit’s Democratic machine, sought out Pingree who quickly took to politics, was a tough campaigner, and became a popular mayor. Pingree challenged the awarding of city contracts for the schools, ferries, toll roads, and street and sewer services. When the private City Railway Company wanted a long-term contract, Pingree forced them to cut fares from 5 cents to 3 cents, a significant benefit to Detroit’s citizens.
When the depression of 1893 put 25,000 of Detroit’s 250,000 people out of work, Pingree, who did not want to increase municipal spending, convinced owners of vacant lots to allow the city to use them, provided seeds and farm implements to the unemployed, and urged people all over the city to start their own potato patches and vegetable plots. In time, he became known as “Potato Patch Pingree” for his efforts.
Samuel M. Jones, known as “Golden Rule Jones,” served as mayor of Toledo, Ohio, from 1897 until 1904. Jones started work as a day laborer, but eventually started his own oil company. When Jones sold the company to Standard Oil, he emerged a rich man. Reform-minded business leaders nominated Jones for mayor in Toledo in an effort to dislodge a corrupt machine. Jones spent municipal funds freely, opening kindergartens, building parks, and instituting an 8-hour day for city workers. He also called on voters to renounce political parties, believing that a nonpartisan approach to politics would work best. The Republican Party, unhappy with Jones’s free-spending ways, refused to renominate him, but he was elected as an independent and continued to serve as a popular mayor until his death. His successor in office, Brand Whitlock, continued his policies through four terms until President Woodrow Wilson appointed Whitlock as U.S. ambassador to Belgium on the eve of World War I. Between them, Jones and Whitlock gave Toledo a national reputation for good government and effective public services when many cities were still mired in corruption and inefficiency. Other cities were also known for their progressive mayors, including San Francisco’s James D. Phelan, 1897-1902, and Cleveland’s Tom Lofton Johnson, 1899-1909.
Grover Cleveland and Hazen S. Pingree both moved from the mayor’s office to become governor of their states. The move was not merely upward political mobility. Many progressive reformers became convinced that legislation at the state level was essential to limit the power of corporations or corrupt urban machines. Other state reforms became core progressive issues, especially proposals for initiative, referendum, and recall, measures aimed at limiting the power of political elites by giving voters the chance to change government policy. South Dakota in the 1890s, Oregon in 1902, and then other states, especially in the West, began adopting these measures. Initiative laws allowed voters to put new laws on the ballot through a petition process while a referendum allowed a similar process to review legislation already in force in a state. Finally recall petitions and votes allowed voters to remove public officials—legislators, mayors, governors—from office before their terms ended. Never as popular east of the Mississippi as in the West, initiative, referendum, and recall were typical progressive measures, based on the same assumption that drove muckraking journalists: an educated and informed public would do the right thing once the right information was in hand.
Governors and legislatures also adopted other reforms in the progressive era. Workers who were injured on the job had been left on their own or blamed for accidents, but progressives passed worker’s compensation laws. Some passed limits on
544 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
This young Pittsburgh miner lost his leg in a mine accident. Referring to people like this worker helped progressives pass worker's compensation laws.
the length of the work day, especially for women, and tried to regulate the safety of working conditions.
Reform came to New York City by a different route. Seth Low, the president of Columbia University, was elected mayor of New York as an anti-Tammany candidate in 1901. He fought graft and instituted civil service reform, but Low was not popular, especially in communities that depended on Tammany, and he was defeated for reelection 2 years later. At that point, New York was back in Tammany hands, and Tammany’s boss, Charles Murphy, was also the most powerful politician in the state although he held no office. After state elections in 1910, however, Murphy launched his own reform efforts. He selected two Tammany loyalists who were among the youngest and newest in the legislature, 33-year-old Robert F. Wagner in the Senate and 38-year-old Alfred E. Smith in the House, to be the party leaders. Wagner and Smith were known as the “Tammany Twins.” In their long political careers, they were also among the most important reformers in American history.
After the Triangle Factory Fire in 1911 (see Chapter 18), Murphy knew they had to do something or lose the support of families who had lost so many daughters and sons in the fire. Murphy directed Wagner and Smith to sponsor the creation of the New York Factory Investigating Commission, which the legislature approved within 3 months. Where Tammany-controlled police officers had harassed striking garment workers only months before, the Tammany-created Factory Investigating Commission hired some of the same strikers to investigate conditions in the city’s garment industries, where they found unsafe and unworkable fire escapes and locked exits. A social worker, Frances Perkins, who had witnessed the Triangle Fire, was one of many to volunteer her services to the Factory Investigating Commission. Perkins also wrote much of the legislation that came from the commission’s work. In the 2 years, Wagner and Smith, working closely with Perkins, pushed 36 measures through the New York legislature, including those requiring sprinklers in high-rise buildings, fire drills in large shops, unlocked exits, and a reorganization of the state Department of Labor to enforce the new regulations.
Later, these New Yorkers would bring progressive legislation to a national stage. Frances Perkins served as the head of the state s Department of Labor and then from 1933 to 1945 as the U.S. Secretary of Labor, the first woman to serve in a
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics
19,1 j
____j
19.2
W’ '
: £ '■
presidential cabinet. Robert Wagner went to Washington as a U.S. Senator where he sponsored legislation creating the Social Security system and legislation guaranteeing unemployment insurance and workers’ compensation. In addition, he sponsored the Wagner Act, which gave labor unions the right to bargain effectively—the most important piece of labor legislation enacted in the United States in the 1900s. Al Smith served as a progressive governor of New York in the 1920s and as the Democratic nominee for U.S. president in 1928, the first Catholic nominated by a major party. Progressive reform had influenced one of the most powerful political machines, Tammany, and in turn, Tammany had cultivated powerfully effective legislators who generated historic reforms.
Progressive Education
In 1899, John Dewey wrote The School and Society, describing what he thought a progressive approach to education should be, one that he had tried to create with his wife, Alice Chapman Dewey, and Ella Flagg Young, a Chicago teacher leader (who would later be superintendent of schools in Chicago, the first woman to lead a big city system). Together, they opened the Laboratory School at the University of Chicago in 1896, a child-centered approach. For Dewey and others, the focus was not on structure at all, but on the child. These child-centered progressives wanted to shift the emphasis in schools from the curriculum to the needs of the child. Progressive education meant many different things to different people, and Dewey represented only one aspect of it. Other educators who also called themselves progressives argued bitterly with him. For some, progressive education meant reorganizing schools to be more business-like, with centralized administrations and bureaucratic top-down modes of decision making. Progressive teachers wanted to restructure schools to give themselves more voice and more influence while also earning better pay and teaching smaller classes. For yet others, the goal was to make education scientific and to use standardized testing to improve schools. Certainly in the field of education there were many movements that called themselves progressive, and no one definition fit all of them.
Jane Addams and the Settlement House Movement
Jane Addams (1860-1935) spent all of her adult life at Hull House in Chicago, living among the city's poor. She not only provided social services but also learned much from her neighbors.
In 1913, when Jane Addams had been living at Hull House on Halsted Street in Chicago for more than 20 years, she summed up her belief about the role of the settlement house and all efforts to improve society. “We have learned to say,” she wrote “that the good must be extended to all of society before it can be held secure by any one person or any one class; but we have not yet learned to add to that statement, that unless all men and all classes contribute to a good, we cannot even be sure it is worth having.” While many progressives might have agreed that society must find a way to extend the good things of life to all citizens, far fewer would have agreed with Addams that all citizens needed to play a role in defining what “good” looked like. Nevertheless, she held firm on both points. At Hull House, social reformers met those they were trying to help in face-to-face encounters, and all involved learned from each other.
Addams was born to a comfortable life in 1860 (her father was a friend of Abraham Lincoln’s) and moved to Chicago in 1889 when she and her friend Ellen Starr opened Hull House. Chicago’s Hull House, though not the first American settlement house, became the model for most others. Addams said she was at Hull House to be a part of the community, not to offer help from above. She knew that she was living there as much to learn as to help her economically poorer neighbors.
Hull House and similar settlement houses in other cities organized badly needed social services in poor urban neighborhoods. Lillian Wald and Mary Brewster founded the Henry Street Settlement and the Henry Street Visiting Nurse Services in New York City’s Lower East Side. Others settlement houses, including Hull House, did the same. Visiting nurses based in settlement houses visited the tenement apartments of the poor and brought medical help.
546 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
American Voices
Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull House, 1910
Jane Addams was a younger contemporary of Mother Jones but from a very different background. She and her good friend Ellen Starr opened Hull House in one of Chicago's poorest neighborhoods in September 1889, and Addams lived there for the next 45 years serving successive generations of Chicago's poor. In the process, she became a nationally and internationally known advocate for settlement houses and, later, for political reform and an end to war. Nevertheless, for all of her national and international travel and fame, her home and her roots remained on Halsted Street where she lived until she died in 1935.
The next January [1889] found Miss Starr and myself in
Chicago, searching for a neighborhood in which we might put our plans into execution. In our eagerness to win friends for the new undertaking, we utilized every opportunity to set forth the meaning of the Settlement as it had been embodied inToynbee Hall, although in those days we made no appeal for money, meaning to start with our own slender resources....
In those early days we were often asked why we had come to live on Halsted Street when we could afford to live somewhere else. I remember one man who used to shake his head and say it was "the strangest thing he had met in his experience," but who was finally convinced that it was "not strange but natural." In time it came to seem natural to all of us that the Settlement should be there. If it is natural to feed the hungry and care for the sick, it is certainly natural to give pleasure to the young, comfort to the aged, and to minister to the deep-seated craving for social intercourse that all men feel. Whoever does it is rewarded by something, which, if not gratitude, is at least spontaneous and vital and lacks that irksome sense of obligation with which a substantial benefit is too often acknowledged....
From the first it seemed understood that we were ready to perform the humblest neighborhood services. We were asked to wash the newborn babies, and to prepare the dead for burial, to nurse the sick, and to "mind the children."...
But in spite of some untoward experiences, we were constantly impressed with the uniform kindness and courtesy we received. Perhaps these first days laid the simple human foundations which are certainly essential for continuous living among the poor: first, genuine preference for residence in an industrial quarter to any other part of the city, because it is interesting, and makes the human appeal; and second, the conviction in the words of Canon Barnett, that the things which make men alike are finer and better than the things that keep them apart, and that these basic likenesses, if they are properly accentuated, easily transcend the less essential differences of race, language, creed, and tradition.
Perhaps even in those first days we made a beginning toward that object which was afterward stated in our charter: "To provide a center for a higher civic and social life; to institute and maintain educational and philanthropic enterprises, and to investigate and improve the conditions in the industrial districts of Chicago."
Source: Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull House (originally published 1910).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
Why did Jane Addams believe that living among the poor was a central part of her mission?
2.	Contextualization
How did Addams see her relationship with the people she served? What aspects of the Progressive movement were reflected in her views?

Under Addams leadership, Hull House did more than provide services to the poor. It also took the side of the poor in labor and legal disputes. When Addams realized that young women strikers were in danger of losing their company housing, Hull House launched a cooperative women’s boarding house. Such direct support for strikers did not endear Addams to some of Chicago’s most powerful leaders who were willing to tolerate, even support, social services but were hostile to her involvement in a strike. Nevertheless, such efforts solidified her base within the communities that mattered the most to her.
Quick Review Why were political reforms, school reforms, and assistance for the working class deemed necessary to improve life in American cities? Which were the most beneficial? Were some harmful?
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 547
RELIGIOUS RESPONSES TO THE GILDED AGE

19.3
Id J

Explain the main currents of religiously based reform movements during the progressive era.
In the late 1800s, reform movements seeking to improve the lives of working people, bring an end to municipal corruption, and build a just economic order often took on the language and style of evangelical religion. Both reform movements and religious revivals emphasized personal and social transformation. Both wanted changes in peoples hearts and were unafraid to use government to bring about changes in behavior. Many reformers were themselves Protestants, and reform efforts were often rooted in the ideas and individualistic ethos of Protestant Christianity.
Temperance and the Woman's Christian Temperance Union
Certainly no political renewal movement was more rooted in Protestant Christianity than the womens campaign against alcohol that began in the 1870s (see Map 19-1). Early in the 1800s, many Protestant ministers began to oppose excessive drinking, and some Protestants took a strong stand against liquor. Still, most Americans continued to drink alcohol. The Panic of 1873, however, led a group of Midwestern women to start a new temperance movement. Many women seemed to reach the same conclusion at about the same time: liquor was consuming their husbands’ wages while leading the men to arrive home drunk and ready to abuse wives and children. The answer to this problem, and the key to defending their homes and families, they said, was a campaign against “Demon Rum.”
State-wide
Prohibition
Before 1900 |	| By 1910
I I
By 1919 Local Option
MAP 19-1 Prohibition in the States. The power of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union is shown in the number of states that, starting with Kansas in 1881, prohibited the sale of alcohol outright and those many more that passed local option laws giving cities and towns the right to ban alcohol.
548 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
In Hillsboro, Ohio, women began to meet to pray and then to take their prayers into the local saloons or, if banned, to stand outside and pray. Through the depression winter of 1873-1874, Ohio women claimed credit for closing some 3,000 saloons. The following fall, in November 1874, 200 women from 17 states met in Cleveland and formed the Woman s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). They were determined to make temperance abstinence from liquor—the key moral and political issue of the decade. In the process, the WCTU empowered a generation of women who had been taught that ladylike behavior meant quietly taking care of home and family and leaving politics to men.
When the WCTU began, Frances E. Willard, dean of women and professor at Northwestern University in Chicago, was too busy with her academic duties to pay much attention. Soon thereafter, however, she left Northwestern to become a full-time organizer for the WCTU. Five years later in 1879, Willard became its second president, and she led the WCTU for the next 24 years until her death in 1898, becoming probably the most prominent woman in the United States at the time.
Under Willard s leadership, the WCTU broadened its goals while never losing sight of ending the use of alcohol. Willard was convinced that “much of the evil by which the country is cursed,” especially the evil of drink, is the fault of “the men in power whose duty is to make and administer the laws.” She took the organization into the political arena, demanding for women the right to vote so they could vote on matters affecting drink and the home. She coined the phrase “home protection” to describe the WCTU’s agenda. If drink was destroying families, she argued, then women needed the right to defend their families. If the WCTU was going to pursue its mission of saving homes and reconstructing the nation, then Willard insisted, “We must show power.”
By the time Willard died, the WCTU had almost 200,000 members, a 12-story national headquarters in Chicago, and a powerful national presence.
Others took the temperance cause in very different directions. Carry Nation, from Kiowa, Kansas, was married to a man who turned out to be a hopeless drunk. After he died, Nation moved and married a nondrinker. In response to what she believed was a call from God, Nation went back to Kiowa and smashed up the local saloon, breaking bottles, mirrors, and pictures. She followed up with “hatchetations” of other saloons and became a national symbol of one version of the temperance movement.
Whether in the direct action of Carry Nation or the more organized approach of Frances Willard, the temperance movement changed the United States. It laid a solid foundation not only for the Eighteenth Amendment that in 1919 banned the manufacture and sale of liquor but also for the Nineteenth Amendment that a few months later in 1920 gave women the right to vote. The temperance crusade also demonstrated the power of organized religion, both in churches led by clergy and in extradenomina-tional organizations often led by women. The United States in the late 1800s was still an overwhelmingly Protestant country, and a movement that could tap the Protestant religious fervor of the nation’s majority could go far.
The Social Gospel
In 1897, Charles M. Sheldon, a young Congregationalist pastor in Topeka, Kansas, published a novel, In His Steps, which eventually sold 15 million copies. In His Steps told of a fictionalized minister who asks his congregation, What would be the result, if in this city every church member should begin to do as Jesus would do?... What would Jesus do in the matter of wealth?” In the novel, the question What would Jesus do?” transformed the town. Similarly, In His Steps also struck a chord in the country. Sheldons question, “What would Jesus do?” led many Protestants to embrace reform movements.
Other religious leaders began to talk of what they called the Social Gospel, which was based on the idea that improving society was both the right thing for religious
Frances Willard (1839-1898) led the Woman's Christian Temperance Union from 1879 to 1898, making it a powerful force in the United States.
Woman's Christian Temperance Union
National organization formed after the Civil War dedicated to prohibiting the sale and distribution of alcohol.
Social Gospel
Application of religious ethics to industrial conditions and thereby alleviating poverty, slums, and labor exploitation.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 549
THINKING HISTORICALLY
How the Other Half Lives

193
Jacob A. Riis, an immigrant from Denmark working as a newspaper police reporter, published How the Other Half Lives in 1890. In that book, Riis sought to describe to the city's well-off residents the housing conditions of New York's poor, especially through his photographs. He described parts of lower Manhattan:
The death of a child in a tenement was registered at the Bureau of Vital Statistics as "plainly due to suffocation in the foul air of an unventilated apartment.".. .Another was the case of a hard-working family of man and wife, young people from the old country, who took poison together in a Crosby Street tenement because they were "tired." There was no other explanation, and none was needed when I stood in the room in which they had lived. It was an attic with sloping ceiling and a single window so far out on the roof that it seemed not to belong to the place at all. With scarcely room enough to turn around in they had been compelled to pay five dollars and a half a month in advance. There were four such rooms in the attic, and together they brought in as much as many a handsome little cottage in a pleasant part of Brooklyn.
Riis said, "the proprietors frequently urged the filthy habits of the tenants as an excuse for the condition of their property, utterly losing sight of the fact that it was the tolerance of those habits which was the real evil, and that for this they themselves were alone responsible." In pinning responsibility for poverty and misery directly on those who profited from it, Riis created considerable hostility toward himself but also great publicity for the book.
Later, Riis described the difficulty he had in getting the How the Other Half Lives published:
For more than a year I had knocked at the doors of the various magazine editors with my pictures, proposing to tell them how the other half lived, but no one wanted to know.... [I]n the church one might, at all events, tell the truth unhindered. So I thought; but there were cautious souls there too.
Eventually, Riis met Dr. Schauffler, the manager of the City Mission Society, and Dr. Josiah Strong, the author of Our Country.
They were impressed with the photos and arranged for Riis to tell the stories within How the Other Half Lives to a group at the Broadway Tabernacle, a Congregational church associated with Schauffler and Strong. Riis continues the account:
One of the editors of Scribner's Magazine saw my pictures and heard their story in his church, and came to talk the matter over with me. As a result of that talk I wrote an article that appeared in the Christmas Scribner's, 1889, under the title "How the Other Half Lives," and made an instant impression.... It could not have been long after I wrote "How the Other Half Lives"that he [Theodore Roosevelt, then Police Commissioner of New York City] came to the Evening Sun office one day looking for me. I was out, and he left his card, merely writing on the back of it that he had read my book and had "come to help."...There is very little ease where Theodore Roosevelt leads, as we all found out....Mr. Roosevelt was a member of the Health Board, and sometimes it was the tenements we went inspecting when the tenants slept. He was after the facts, and learned speedily to get them as he could. When as Governor, he wanted to know just how the Factory Law was being executed, he came down from Albany and spent a whole day with me personally investigating tenements in which sweating [sweatshop manufacturing done at home] was carried on.
Source: Jacob A. Riis, The Making of an American (New York: Macmillan, 1901), pp. 191 -225.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
What might have been some of the reasons Riis had trouble getting his pictures published? How do you think real estate owners responded to his pictures and his explanations of conditions?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the contributions of Riis, Roosevelt, and Addams to the Progressive movement. What common beliefs, approaches, and goals did they share?
people to do and, indeed, God’s will. There were many social gospel preachers, but the most prominent was Walter Rauschenbusch whose 1917 book A Theology for the Social Gospel broadened the definition of sin from a focus on individual flaws to include social institutions that oppressed others. Rauschenbusch was far from alone in advocating a social gospel. George D. Herron was a pastor whose most famous sermon, “The Message of Jesus to Men of Wealth” claimed simply that “a rich Christian is a contradiction of terms.” Josiah Strong edited a social gospel magazine, The Gospel of the Kingdom, and published a book, Our Country, pleading for missionary work within American cities and around the world. In every city, local city mission societies carried out their own social gospel mission.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914

Even more than his writing, the photographs that Jacob Riis made, like this one titled "Sleeping Quarters Areaway, Mulberry St.," showed middle-class America the poverty in which "the other half" lived.
i 19/1
; M2
WJ
While the social gospel was a Protestant movement, social issues also swept Catholic America. Cardinal James Gibbons, the long-time archbishop of Baltimore and nominal leader of American Catholics, defended the American labor movement and the role of Catholics in it to a wary Vatican. Gibbons argued that the rise of monopolies with their “heartless avarice” demanded action.
Not all religious communities shared in the social gospel movement, however. Many first-generation Jewish immigrants put all of their religious energy into secular political reform and labor movements. Some rabbis, in turn, worried that the focus on secular politics would undermine the spiritual world of the immigrants. Parish priests in Italian, German, and Czech parishes in Chicago tangled with the anarchists and union radicals whom they saw as taking people away from the faith. Some Catholics focused on private devotional activities or large street festivals often devoted to the Virgin Mary, seeing their faith as a refuge from the larger society rather than a way to change society. They valued the ministry of individuals like Frances Xavier Cabrini—Mother Cabrini—sent to the United States by an Italian bishop in 1889 to serve the needs of the Italian immigrants but who, unlike Cardinal Gibbons, avoided labor organizing and politics. Religious people, like others, had widely differing ideas about how to live well in the new urban and industrial society of the United States.
Quick Review How were religiously inspired progressives similar to or different from other progressive reformers?
PROGRESSIVE POLITICS ON THE NATIONAL STAGE
Analyze the three "progressive presidents" and their administrations.
A significant turning point in American politics came early in the morning of
September 14, 1901, when President William McKinley died in Buffalo, New York.
He had been visiting the Pan American Exposition when he was shot by a lone anar-
chist, Leon Czolgosz, on September 6. Ihe president survived the bullet but died of the
infection that followed. McKinley was the third American president to be assassinated
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 55
19.4
Theodore Roosevelt
552 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power-
after Abraham Lincoln in 1865 and James A. Garfield in 1881. Ihe fact that Czolgosz described himself as an anarchist led to a strong backlash against the anarchist movement, just regaining its political standing after the widespread hostility to anarchism engendered by the Haymarket violence of 1886 (see Chapter 18).
Vice President Theodore Roosevelt, who had been on a camping trip with his family in New York’s Adirondack Mountains when McKinley was shot, arrived in Buffalo to take the oath of office. Sitting on the train bringing McKinley’s body from Buffalo to Washington, DC, was Ohio Senator Mark Hanna, who had helped McKinley select Roosevelt as Vice President. Hanna understood what the transition meant for many like him who constituted the old guard of the Republican Party. “Now look!” Hanna muttered, “That damned cowboy is President of the United States!”
There was a reason that some referred to the new president as a cowboy. Theodore Roosevelt had already had an extraordinary career in and out of politics when he ascended to the presidency. Born to a wealthy New York family whose roots went back to Dutch New York, he grew up as a sometimes awkward and sickly child. He compensated by lifting weights and learning to box. He attended Harvard College, was elected to the New York state assembly at 23, a year after his marriage to Alice Hathaway Lee. When his wife died, Roosevelt abandoned politics for a cowboy life in the Dakotas. He soon returned to New York, married Edith Kermit Carow, and started on his rapid political ascent. He was appointed U.S. civil service commissioner at age 31, police commissioner of New York at 37, and assistant secretary of the Navy at 39. During the Spanish-American War, Roosevelt took command of a unit in Cuba known as the Rough Riders, making himself a war hero. He was elected governor of New York when he had just turned 40 and was already plotting his own campaign for the presidency.
Roosevelt’s hopes for the presidency were almost derailed by his differences with the old guard in the New York Republican Party. As governor, Roosevelt wanted to end corruption, tax the street railways, and provide for industrial safety as well as workmen’s compensation for those injured on the job. He had advocated for the inspection of tenement housing since being shown their conditions by Jacob Riis. But not everyone in New York, Democrats or Republicans, liked those new ideas.
Ihe boss of the Republican Party in New York, state Senator Tom Platt, supported Roosevelt for governor in November 1898 because his war hero popularity and anticorruption image seemed the only way to win the election and maintain Republican power. But once Platt discovered that Roosevelt actually meant what he said, the boss decided he needed to get rid of the governor before he wrecked the Republican machine. Platt planned to sideline Roosevelt by getting him the nomination as McKinley’s running mate for 1900. Roosevelt did not want the nomination. In 1900, no sitting vice president had been elected president since Martin Van Buren succeeded Andrew Jackson more than half a century earlier. Even so, the nomination was hard to reject without seeming disloyal to the party. McKinley and Roosevelt won the election, and state politics in New York returned to normal. Then, only months into McKinley’s second term, the president was dead and the reforming politician from New York was the president of the United States. At the age of 42, he was also the youngest president ever. Teddy Roosevelt—Progressive President
Taking the oath of office, the new president promised “to carry out absolutely unbroken” the former president’s policies. One observer responded, “yes, the same way one carries out the trash.” That comment represented an accurate view of the new president. After a brief period of mourning, very brief for him personally, the White House and the country started to experience Roosevelts considerable reforming energy, which New Yorkers had known for some time.
-Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
THE TRUSTBUSTER AND THE SQUARE DEAL
Roosevelt soon outlined his departure from McKinley and his determination to limit the power of industrial corporations. TR (as he came to be known to everyone) told Congress that “there are real and grave evils that come from the power of the great corporations, and the federal government needed to assume the authority to supervise and limit that power. Only a month before Roosevelt spoke to Congress, James J. Hill, owner of the Great Northern Railroad, and E. H. Harriman, who controlled the Union Pacific Railroad, met with representatives of J. Pierpont Morgan, who controlled the Northern Pacific Railroad. These three lines were competitors across the northern plains. Ihe competition among them kept prices low and helped farmers and industries who wanted to ship their products. As had been the case with steel less than a year before, such competition struck Morgan as terribly inefficient and a drain on profits. Hill, Harriman, and Morgan solved their problem by creating a new entity, The Northern Securities Company Limited, to which they then sold all of their railroads. In place of competition, the transcontinental railroad routes would now be one happy family.
Roosevelt did not mention Northern Securities in his December speech, and some industrialists hoped that his speech was mere rhetoric. Then in February 1902, the attorney general announced that, at the president’s request, he was filing suit under the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act to break up Northern Securities. To the new president, the Northern Securities Company was too big and too powerful, and the lack of competition on the rails meant that the new trust could charge virtually any rates it wanted to haul freight and passengers.
Roosevelt’s actions were not the first time that the Progressive movement led the federal government to take action. In response to the assassination of President Garfield by a disappointed office seeker in 1881, Congress passed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act of 1883, which sought to replace political patronage with merit in the selection of government employees. Chester A. Arthur, the vice president who became president when Garfield died, strongly supported the act and lost the backing of the bosses in his own party for doing so. The act created the Civil Service Commission whose job it was to give federal employees a measure of protection from losing their jobs over their political ideas while keeping federal civil servants—not elected officials—from actively fundraising or campaigning. In addition, in response to public pressure about the power of monopolies, Congress had passed the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890, which its sponsor Senator John Sherman of Ohio said was to outlaw any business practices that would unfairly raise costs for the consumer.
The Pendleton Act, however, covered only about 10% of federal employees when it was passed and none at the state or local level. The Sherman Act had been a virtual dead letter after a series of court cases reduced its scope soon after it was passed. Suddenly, with the Northern Securities suit, a new administration was bringing the Sherman Act back to life and warning of further progressive initiatives to follow.
Soon after the suit was announced, J. P. Morgan visited the White House for a private meeting with the president and the attorney general. Morgan told the president, If we have done anything wrong, send your man to my man and they can fix it up. Roosevelt, who saw things quite differently said, “That can t be done, and Attorney General Philander Chase Knox added, “We don’t want to fix it up, we want to stop it.” Morgan then asked if the government was now going to attack his other interests, especially U.S. Steel, and Roosevelt responded, “Certainly not—unless we find out that in any case they have done something that we regard as wrong. After Morgan left, Roosevelt told Knox he found it quite revealing that Morgan could deal with him only as “a big rival operator,” with whom to make a deal. But there would be no deal.
The Northern Securities case took 2 years to move through the federal courts, but in March 1904, the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed Roosevelt’s interpretation of the Sherman Act. The majority opinion said that “No scheme or device could...more
Sherman Antitrust Act
The first federal antitrust measure, passed in 1890; sought to promote economic competition by prohibiting business combinations in restraint of trade or commerce.
Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act
A law of 1883 that reformed the spoils system by prohibiting government workers from making political contributions and by creating the Civil Service Commission to oversee their appointment on the basis of merit rather than politics.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 55.
effectively and certainly suppress free competition and ordered the Northern Security trust broken up into competing lines. From then on, Roosevelt would be known as the “trustbuster,” and he liked the title.
Roosevelt kept up the pressure for change. In a series of speeches in the summer of 1902, he told audiences, “The great corporations which we have grown to speak of rather loosely as trusts are the creatures of the State, and the State not only has the right to control them, but it is in duty bound to control them wherever need of such control is shown.” His natural inclination to expand the government’s power to supervise corporations was supported by many in Congress and by muckraking publications like McClure’s, which Roosevelt may have disliked, but which nonetheless provided him with new ammunition with every issue. Roosevelt wanted a new cabinet-level Department of Commerce with investigative authority, a ban on secret deals between railroads and specific companies (of the sort that launched Rockefeller’s oil empire), and additional funds for the Department of Justice to expedite antitrust cases. Ironically, once Roosevelt had won his Northern Securities victory and gained the tools that Congress gave him, he did not pursue many other antitrust cases. The Taft and Wilson administrations would use the new tools more than Roosevelt himself. The president had made his point. As was often the case during his 7 years in office, having done so, he moved on to other issues.
CONSERVATION IN NATURE
As a child, Theodore Roosevelt was a birdwatcher and developed an intense love of nature. Years later, he walked into a cabinet meeting and asked, “Gentlemen, do you know what has happened this morning?” The members of the cabinet waited for important news. Roosevelt told them, “Just now I saw a chestnut-sided warbler—and this is only February!” The birds did not usually appear in Washington on their return from Central America until much later in the spring. While Roosevelt loved nature, watched birds, and as president saved thousands of acres of land from development, he was also an avid hunter who loved to shoot bear, cougar, or just about anything in the wilderness. However on one bear hunt in 1902, Roosevelt refused to shoot a bear that had been captured and tied to a tree so the president could have the honor of the shot. He was happy to kill many other bears on real hunts, but attacking a tied-up bear was unsportsmanlike. His refusal made national news and sparked a new craze, fostered by the Steiff and Ideal toy companies—a new toy known as a Teddy Bear in honor of the president who would not shoot one.
Just before he became vice president, Roosevelt published The Strenuous Life in which he argued that Americans were getting far too little time to replenish their bodies and souls in the great outdoors. But the strenuous life in nature that he advocated was only possible if the wilderness and the wildlife were preserved for future generations to enjoy. Once he became president, Roosevelt combined all of this considerable enthusiasm for nature with his political skill to become perhaps the most conservation-minded of any president.
Although a keenly passionate advocate, Roosevelt was not, however, the first president to care about conservation. Harrison, Cleveland, and McKinley all set aside federal lands for permanent parks, and both Yellowstone and the Grand Canyon were federal reserves before Roosevelt took office. But from Roosevelt’s perspective, too few animals were protected, too little land had been put aside, and too little was being done to protect the environment.
Even though his attack on the trusts got most of the headlines, a short line in TR’s December 1901 message to Congress said, “The preservation of our forests is an imperative business necessity.” People like his friend Gifford Pinchot and members of the Audubon and Sierra clubs cheered. Western senators were furious at an attack on the prime source of wealth in their states. Again, some hoped that it was a mere rhetorical flourish. They soon learned differently. When Roosevelt came to the presidency in 1901, 43 million acres of land were included in U.S. forest reserves. When he left office in 1909, that number had increased more than fourfold to 194 million acres.
34 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Roosevelt also professionalized the protection of nature. He wrote that the “Nation as a whole should earnestly desire and strive to leave to the next generation the National honor unstained and the National resources unexhausted,” and only new conservation efforts would preserve either honor or resources. He appointed a former Rough Rider, David E. Warford, as a federal forest ranger with authority to protect the 4.15 million acres of federal land in Arizona and Colorado. He nominated Gifford Pinchot, who shared the president’s commitment, to be head of the Division of Forestry and, later, head of the U.S. Forest Service in the Department of the Interior and gave him “an absolutely free hand.”
Between 1906 and 1908, Roosevelt used—or misused, as his critics said— authority given to him by the Antiquities Act of 1906 to declare a 295-acre stand of giant redwood trees just north of San Francisco as Muir Woods National Monument; 800,000 acres in Arizona as the Grand Canyon National Monument; and 2,500 acres, later expanded to 26,000 acres, as the Pinnacles National Monument in California. He also set aside the Natural Bridges National Monument in Utah and a dozen other similar monuments, ensuring that the land would never pass into private hands (see Map 19-2).
The president’s continued expansion of the amount of land protected by the federal government provoked resistance in Congress. In early 1907, Senator Charles W. Fulton, a Republican from Oregon, attached an amendment to the Department of Agriculture’s appropriations bill that said that no further forest reserves or expansions of reserves could be created within six western states without an act of Congress. When the bill reached the president, he had 10 days to sign it or risk having no funds to operate the Department of Agriculture. Roosevelt quickly approved a total of 21 new forest reserves in the six states—Medicine Bow Forest in Colorado, Priest River Forest in Idaho and Washington, Toiyabe Forest in Nevada, Blue Mountain in Oregon, and
Hawaii Volcano-1916/191
PACIFIC OCEAN
National parks with date of initial protection and date of current designation
National forests
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Biscayne 1968/1980
Everglades
1934
MAP 19-2 Major National Parks. While the federal government claimed ownership of much of the land in the West, no president matched Theodore Roosevelt in setting aside large tracts of that land as national parks and forests so it would be preserved for future generations rather than be sold or developed.
r,______A A_____Drnnmrci\/a PnlitirC

Olympic and Rainier forests in Washington. When the paperwork creating these new forests was done, Roosevelt then signed the agriculture bill with Fulton’s amendment, saying that no additional forests would be created.
Roosevelt and African-Americans
One of Roosevelt’s first moves as president was to invite Booker T. Washington, the country’s best known African-American, to the White House for a meeting and then, in October 1901, for dinner with the president and his family. No African-American had ever before eaten a meal as a guest at the White House. Roosevelt was making a very public statement about race relations in the United States. He was also taking a first step toward securing a full term as elected president for himself. Booker T. Washington controlled a block of delegates to the Republican nominating conventions since even though blacks could not vote in the segregated South of Roosevelt’s day, they could and did win election as delegates to national Republican nominating conventions.
Although neither Roosevelt nor Washington discussed the dinner in public, the press made a great deal of the evening. While some reports were positive, papers like the Memphis Scimitar called the dinner “The most damnable outrage which has ever been perpetrated by any citizen of the United States.”
For the rest of his 7 years in the White House, Roosevelt had a decidedly mixed record on African-American concerns. He did not mention black disenfranchisement or lynching in his first presidential message to Congress. However, in his 1906 annual message to Congress, he said, “The members of the white race... should understand that every lynching represents by just so much a loosening of the bands of civilization.” They were important words, though with too little follow-up. In symbolic ways—the White House dinner and speeches on lynching—Roosevelt did more to support African-Americans than several of his predecessors or successors. In comparison to the energy he gave to other issues he considered important, however, his track record was certainly lackluster.
Roosevelt's Continuing Popularity
Roosevelt’s obvious joy at life and enjoyment of the presidency was infectious. People loved having a young and enthusiastic chief executive. A friend once said of Roosevelt that he “wanted to be the bride at every wedding and the corpse at every funeral.”
Roosevelt’s large family brought life and vitality to the previously staid White House. Alice, daughter of his first marriage, was a young adult who flirted with and charmed everyone she met, including Ohio Congressman Nicholas Longworth whom she married in a White House wedding. She would continue to charm Washington society for the next three-quarters of a century. The president and Edith’s younger children, Ted, Kermit, Ethel, Archie, and Quentin played at the White House, chasing rabbits on the White House grounds, marching with the White House police, and riding bicycles on the lawn and occasionally down the stairs.
In 1904, the Republicans easily nominated Roosevelt for a full term. Having lost with Bryan in 1896 and 1900, Democrats were looking for a fresh face and nominated Alton B. Parker, chief justice of the New York Court of Appeals. It was not a close contest. Parker was a colorless candidate, but it is unlikely that any Democrat could have won. Republicans were the country’s major party and Roosevelt’s energy carried the day. He won by a landslide.
After his reelection, Roosevelt’s popularity only grew, and he and everyone knew that he could easily win a third term or, as his daughter Alice kept saying, “a second elected term” if he were a candidate in 1908. Nevertheless, he had promised himself and the country in 1904 that he would not seek a third term, saying as he claimed victory in November 1904, “The wise custom which limits the President to two terms regards the substance and not the form.” As 1908 approached, the president was tempted to break the pledge but did not. Roosevelt’s goal in 1908 was to find a
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
556
candidate who would carry on the policies that he had championed. He thought he had found just the right candidate in Secretary of War, William Howard Taft.
Taft Wins, Taft Loses—The Elections of 1908 and 1912
William Howard Taft, who had served as a federal district court judge in Ohio before becoming governor general of the Philippines and then secretary of war, would have loved an appointment to the Supreme Court, one he finally won in 1921 when Warren Harding appointed him. But in 1908, Roosevelt had picked Taft as the successor most likely to continue his programs, and once Roosevelt had made up his mind, there was little that Taft or anyone else could do to stop him.
Having failed miserably with the conservative Alton Parker in the 1904 election, the Democrats returned to William Jennings Bryan for a third try for the White House. The Socialist Party was also growing in strength and their candidate, Eugene V. Debs, made a respectable showing. But the election was never really in doubt, and Taft won easily on the promise to continue Roosevelt’s progressivism.
TAFT’S ADMINISTRATION, TAFT’S POLICIES
Not surprisingly, given their very different personalities, tensions between the outgoing and the incoming president began even before Taft’s inauguration. Roosevelt expected Taft to keep most of the existing cabinet; Taft wanted some of his own people. Most disappointing to the conservationist Roosevelt, Taft replaced Secretary of the Interior James R. Garfield, an ardent conservationist, with Richard A. Ballinger, a Seattle lawyer and former reform mayor, who was more interested in exploiting public lands than conserving them. Nevertheless, Taft kept Gifford Pinchot on at the U.S. Forest Service, and Roosevelt sailed for Africa soon after the inauguration, confident that the country was in good hands. Taft kept a key Roosevelt-Taft pledge and called Congress into special session in early 1909 to lower the nation’s tariff rates. Ida Tarbell, one of the best known muckraking journalists, insisted that the poor could not afford warm clothing because of the high tariff charged on imported wool, and many economists felt that overly high tariffs were protecting industries that no longer needed protection. Income and inheritance taxes seemed more equitable ways to pay for the government. But not everyone in Congress agreed, especially Rhode Island Senator Nelson Aldrich and House Speaker Joe Cannon.
New York Representative Sereno Payne proposed reducing the tariff rates and substituting an income tax. But when the bill reached the Senate, Aldrich dropped the income tax and revised the tariffs up—significantly. Aldrich acknowledged that the Republican platform had promised to revise the tariff, but he asked, “Where did we ever make the statement that we would revise the tariff downward?” Everyone knew that the downward revision had been the promise, but it was not the outcome. Even most moderate Republicans criticized the Payne-Aldrich tariff, but Taft signed the bill. When Congress later passed bills to lower the tariff on cotton, wool, steel, and iron, Taft vetoed them. In the process, he built an alliance with the conservative Aldrich wing of the party, losing the support of many Roosevelt progressives.
While Roosevelt was in Africa, word came to him in January 1910 that Taft had fired Pinchot. Pinchot wrote to the former president, “We have fallen back down the hill you led us up.” The tariff might be abstract to Roosevelt, but conservation was the issue nearest and dearest to him, and Pinchot was the agent TR had counted on to keep the movement alive in the new administration.
On many fronts, Taft kept his pledge to carry out Roosevelt’s policies, in some cases with more vigor than TR had ever shown. It was Taft, not Roosevelt, who decreed an 8-hour workday for government employees and who advocated the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution, passed in 1913, to ensure that federal income taxes could be collected. In addition, Taft was a far tougher trustbuster than Roosevelt, breaking up John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company and bringing more antitrust suits in his 4 years than Roosevelt did in 7.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 5
A widely distributed cartoon showed former president Roosevelt's disappointment with his hand-picked, but ensnarled, successor president Taft.
THE UNIQUE ELECTION OF
1912 Roosevelt was not alone in his estrangement from the Taft administration. Critics abounded, and Senator Robert La Follette of Wisconsin was hinting broadly that he might challenge Taft for the Republican presidential nomination in 1912. La Follette was a different kind of progressive from Roosevelt. He advocated a more open nominating process for candidates and an income tax to limit the power of the very rich. He wanted to destroy the monopolies that Roosevelt wanted only to regulate. La Follette was also appalled by concessions to the white South, believing that if African-Americans “had been fairly treated,” then they would have been able to take the places now denied them as farmers and businessmen. As Roosevelt waited, La Follette campaigned for the nomination. Then in February 1912, La Follette gave a speech in Philadelphia in which, either exhausted or drunk, he went on for over 2 hours, repeating himself again and again. He lost not only his audience but also the nomination with that speech. A week later, seven Republican governors asked Roosevelt to run. TR announced, “My hat is in the ring” and wrote, “I will accept the nomination for President if it is tendered to me.” He also set out to be sure that the 1912 nomination was, in fact, so tendered.
Through the spring, Taft and Roosevelt fought it out—Taft always reluctantly, Roosevelt with his usual exuberance. In the South, Taft used the party machinery to control the delegates. Roosevelt defended his challenge saying, “If that be revolution, make the most of it.” Taft responded, “This wrenches my soul... .1 do not want to fight Theodore Roosevelt, but sometimes a man in a corner fights. I am going to fight.”
Taft won in the states where delegates were controlled by caucuses while Roosevelt won nearly all of the states that held primary elections, including Pennsylvania, California, Minnesota, Nebraska, Maryland, South Dakota, and even Taft’s home state of Ohio. After seeing the primary returns, Idaho Senator William E. Borah declared, “There can be but one result, and that is the nomination of Mr. Roosevelt,” and Nebraska’s Senator George Norris happily said, “Taft is out of the race.”
Taft, however, was not out of the race. He still controlled the party machinery. When delegates were contested—and 254 convention seats were contested—the Republican National Committee decided who should vote at the convention. The committee awarded 235 of the contested delegates to Taft and only 19 to Roosevelt, sealing the nomination for Taft.
Two months after the Republican convention, in early August 1912, a new Progressive Party held its convention in the same hall. The 14,000 delegates were mostly middle-class reformers—social workers, teachers, and owners of small businesses.
558 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
It was the first major political convention to include female delegates, and there were
many. Also attending were a few African-American delegates from border states and
New England, none from the Deep South where Taft controlled the party. Few of the
farmers and laborers representing past Populist Party conventions were there. The plat-
form included support for the rights of labor unions, conservation, women’s suffrage,
the 8-hour workday, workplace safety, as well as unemployment and old age insurance.
In a doomed effort to court white Southern votes, the platform was silent on the rights
of African-Americans. By acclamation, the convention nominated Theodore Roosevelt
for president and California Governor Hiram Johnson for vice president. In the first
convention speech by a woman, Jane Addams seconded Roosevelt’s nomination.
Roosevelt, saying that he felt as fit as a Bull Moose,” happily accepted the nomination.
A convention like no other launched a presidential election like no other.
Many Democrats saw the Republican split as the chance for a Democratic
presidency. Champ Clark of Missouri, the speaker of the house, was the frontrunner.
He was popular within the party, but was a dull speaker. Oscar Underwood of Alabama
was more conservative, but perhaps a better speaker than Clark. Others hoped to
be kingmakers. Charles Murphy, the boss of Tammany, controlled the New York
delegation while William Jennings Bryan controlled many other delegates. Finally, the
governor of New Jersey, Woodrow Wilson, campaigned for the nomination.
Wilson had only held elected office for 2 years. He was an expert on constitutional
law with a Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins, who had served as the president of Princeton
University from 1902 to 1910. He had sought to transform Princeton from a country
club for rich boys to a serious academic institution. He battled with faculty, alumni,
and trustees and showed little aptitude for compromise.
In 1910, just as Wilson saw some of his most cherished goals defeated at Princeton,
the political bosses who ran the Democratic Party in New Jersey were looking for
an appealing candidate for governor. They offered Wilson the nomination, and he
surprised even his supporters by being a magnetic candidate, winning easily. Then,
to the surprise of the bosses, Wilson kept his word that he would be independent,
broke with those who had put him in the governor’s office, and refused to follow their
lead in patronage. He governed as a progressive, getting the state to adopt workmen’s
compensation, a commission to regulate public utilities, and more open election laws,
winning great popularity as well as the undying hatred of political bosses. Wilson
entered the Democratic nominating convention as a strong candidate, but not the
leader. While Clark led on the first ballots, Wilson kept gaining; on the 46 ballot,
exhausted delegates gave Wilson their party’s nomination.
With the nominations of Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson—a former, the current, and
a future president—the 1912 election was unique. In addition, a fourth candidate,
Eugene V. Debs, was once again the candidate of the Socialist Party, and by 1912, the
Socialists were a force to be reckoned with. In local elections the year before, Socialist
candidates had been elected as mayor in 56 cities and towns, and one of the party’s
candidates, Victor Berger, was elected to Congress from Wisconsin. The Socialist
Party, always highly factionalized, enthusiastically nominated Debs as their standard
bearer for a fourth time. Some Socialists worried that Roosevelt’s Progressive Party
would steal their platform, but while the Progressive Party called for governmental
oversight of the monopolies, the Socialists called for government ownership of all
large-scale industries—especially the railroads. Like the Progressives, the Socialist
platform also called for shorter working hours, workers compensation, electoral
reform, and giving women the right to vote. However, unlike the Progressives, it also
called for ensuring blacks the right to vote.
Wilson wrote to a friend that “Roosevelt’s strength is altogether incalculable. Ihe
contest is between him and me, not between Taft and me. He was right. It was dif-
ficult for Wilson, who was running as a progressive Democrat, to differentiate himself
from Roosevelt’s Progressive Party. If the contest was to be one of personal popularity,
no one was more popular than Teddy Roosevelt. Boston attorney Louis D. Brandeis
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics
559
New Freedom
5 Woodrow Wilson's 1912 program for govern-| ment intervention in the economy to restore i competition by curtailing the business
_ monopolies, thereby providing opportunities __ fQr jnjjyjjuai achievement.
19.4
suggested a way forward to Wilson. While Roosevelt spoke of the New Nationalism and governmental controls over the monopoly trusts, Brandeis suggested Wilson should speak of a New Freedom that would give people the greatest freedom by simply breaking up the great trusts and fostering competition at every level. Four years later, Brandeis would receive his reward when Wilson appointed him as the first Jew to serve on the U.S. Supreme Court.
In the fall campaign, Wilson called Roosevelt a “self-appointed divinity” who wanted to control the trusts and people’s lives. Wilson, in contrast, wanted freedom from trusts and from government regulation. “Ours is a program of liberty,” he said, “theirs is a program of regulation.” Roosevelt struck back, saying that Wilson’s approach was “simply the laissez-faire doctrine of. ..three-quarters of a century ago.” Taft morosely stayed on the sidelines. Debs went after them all.
While Roosevelt was speaking in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in October, a would-be assassin shot him at close range. The bullet lodged in Roosevelt s chest but a heavy coat and the text of a long speech that was in the coat pocket prevented a serious injury. Roosevelt, with typical pluck, went ahead with an hour-long speech before allowing himself to be taken to a hospital. His chances of victory improved as stories of his courage spread. In the end, however, the deep division within the Republican ranks, their failure to crack the Democrats’ hold on the “solid South,” and Wilson’s use of Brandeis’s antitrust rhetoric all ensured the outcome. Wilson won the popular vote with over a million votes more than Roosevelt, who defeated Taft by another half-million. Debs came in fourth with just over 900,000 votes (see Map 19-3).
	Electoral Vote (%)	Popular Vote (%)
WOODROW WILSON
435 6,296,547 (Democrat)	(82)	(42)
Theodore Roosevelt		4,118,571
(Progressive)		
William Taft		3,486,720
(Republican)		(23)
Eugene Debs		900,672
(Socialist)		(6)
MAP 19-3 The Election of 1912. This map shows the breadth of Woodrow Wilson's electoral victory after Roosevelt and Taft split the Republican vote and Debs failed to gain traction as the Socialist Party candidate.
Woodrow Wilson's New Freedom
Woodrow Wilson planned four major initiatives for his administration—conservation, access to raw materials, banking and finance, and the tariff and taxes. He announced that he would call the new Democratic-majority Congress into a special session in April 1913, a month after his inauguration and months ahead of when it would normally meet.
While Wilson spoke to the importance of conservation in his inaugural address, and while he did push the creation of the National Park Service, his commitment to conservation did not come close to Roosevelt’s. Wilsonian progressivism focused elsewhere.
Only a month after the inauguration, Wilson broke a custom followed by every president since Jefferson and gave a speech in person to a joint session of Congress. Widely televised presidential addresses to Congress are now such a normal feature of American life that is it easy to forget that no president from Jefferson to Taft ever spoke directly to Congress. Nevertheless, Wilson did, and he continued to do so throughout his two terms in office.
Wilson’s first congressional victory was the passage of the Underwood-Simmons tariff, which the new president signed in October 1913. Cleveland, McKinley, Roosevelt, and Taft all failed to get tariff reductions through Congress, mostly because of the power that lobbyists had with the Senate. But Wilson managed to embarrass several senators with a very public investigation of the role of lobbyists. He also met privately with several Democratic senators to hear their concerns and shore up their support. In the end, Wilson got a new tariff that reduced the tax on goods imported into the United States by at least 10 percent across the board, more on some things. The new law also used the power given in the new Sixteenth Amendment to introduce the first federal income tax since the Civil War, starting at 1 percent on incomes above $4,000 (considerably more than most Americans made in 1913).
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Woodrow Wilson broke a precedent going back to Thomas Jefferson and began the modern practice of presidential speeches to a joint session of Congress.
Wilson then turned to reform of the nation’s banking system. Since Andrew Jackson closed the Bank of the United States in the 1830s, the federal government’s role in the nation’s banking system had been very limited. In the financial panics of 1893 and 1907, J. P. Morgan had acted as the nation’s banker, ensuring that the nation’s credit system stayed intact. While Morgan’s interventions were essential to protect the government and the nation’s largest banks, they did little to help farmers or proprietors of small businesses or to allow the government to control the supply of money, a role that Bryan and his followers had been demanding for a long time.
Working closely with Virginia Senator Carter Glass, Wilson was able to create the Federal Reserve system in a matter of months. Following the advice of Brandeis that “concessions to big business interests must in the end prove futile,” the president spent no time with representatives of business but, instead, built a coalition of the many factions within the Democratic Party and of progressive Republicans. The final bill passed the House 287 to 85, and the Senate, after a desperate last-minute attempt to derail the bill by Frank A. Vanderlip of the National City Bank of New York, passed the bill 54 to 34. Before the end of his first year in office, Wilson and the Congress had created the Federal Reserve that remains the core of the nation’s banking system.
During the presidential campaign, Wilson had differentiated himself from Roosevelt with his claim that he was the real “trustbuster.” In office, he supported his Attorney General James McReynolds in attacking the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, United States Steel, and the New Haven Railroad, all companies in which J. P. Morgan had an interest. Then he went to Congress and asked for more authority. The Clayton Anti-Trust Act, signed in October 1914, outlawed interlocking directorates (under which the same individuals might serve on the boards of directors of supposedly competing companies), and defined unfair trade practices, including the kind of collusion over prices that had allowed John D. Rockefeller to create the
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics 561
1
!
19.2
----- Federal Trade Commission
Government agency established in 1914 19 J t0 provjc|e regulatory oversight of business _____activity.
19.4
Standard Oil monopoly. Perhaps most important, the Clayton Act exempted labor unions and farmer cooperatives from the definition of a combination in restraint of trade,” a charge that had been used in federal court cases against unions since Eugene Debs was sent to jail the 1890s. Although the bill did not give unions everything they wanted, Samuel Gompers declared it to be the Magna Carta, of labor union organizing. Separate legislation also strengthened the investigative powers of the Interstate Commerce Commission and created a new Federal Trade Commission with a specific, if somewhat vague, mandate to limit the growth and power of monopolies.
While Wilson delivered quickly on some of his reformist campaign pledges, he deeply disappointed other followers. When the House passed legislation outlawing child labor in February 1915, Wilson did nothing and the bill died in the Senate. Only much later in his presidency did he support effective child labor legislation. He also disappointed farmers, a key Democratic constituency, when he quietly allowed a plan for rural credits to help farmers with mortgages to die in congressional conference committee.
African-Americans were greatly disappointed with Wilson. Booker T. Washington had a long-standing link to the Republican Party, but during the 1912 campaign, younger blacks, including African Episcopal Zion Bishop Alexander Walters and W.E.B. Du Bois, endorsed Wilson. It was a significant departure from the African-American-Republican Party alliance that had existed since Reconstruction. Perhaps, these leaders argued, this Virginia-born and Georgia-reared intellectual could finally break the hold of segregationists on the Democratic Party. During the campaign, Wilson was happy to receive their support, but once in office, Wilson spoke only vaguely of a federal commission to investigate race relations in the United States and allowed his cabinet to set policy that did not support the African-American cause.
Citing what they said was white anger at “racial mingling,” especially in Southern post offices, Post Master General Albert S. Burleson and Secretary of the Treasury William Gibbs McAdoo ordered the segregation of offices, rest rooms, and eating facilities at the Post Office, Treasury Department, and Bureau of Printing and Engraving. Federal employees who had long worked in racially integrated settings were now segregated by race. The Democratic majority in Congress allowed segregationist senators like James K. Vardaman of Mississippi to block black appointments to federal jobs that previous Republican presidents had provided.
The black press attacked Wilson for the segregation policy and the lack of federal appointments. Wilson’s most pointed confrontation about his racial policies was with the African-American editor William Monroe Trotter of Boston. In November of 1913, Trotter met with the president to lay out a long list of specific concerns about segregation in the federal service and the lack of African-Americans being hired in the government. Wilson responded blandly, saying, “Now, mistakes have probably been made, but those mistakes can be corrected.” A year later, Trotter led another delegation to the White House and received another round of bland vagueness. Trotter lost his temper saying, “We are here as full-fledged American citizens” and reminded Wilson of the support he had received from African-Americans. Wilson in turn lost his temper, telling Trotter, “You are an American citizen...but you are the only American citizen that has ever come into this office who has talked to me with [such] a tone.” The president insisted that Trotter be excluded from any future meeting, but there would be few future meetings with African-Americans with or without Trotter.
Wilson’s reputation in the African-American community was further tarnished when in early 1915 he allowed one of the first full-length motion pictures, D. W. Griffith’s Birth of a Nation, to be shown at the White House. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People was actively protesting the film, which, though a masterpiece of cinematography, was also a glorification of the Ku Klux Kian. Wilson did not endorse the film, but the president also refused to announce his nonendorsement. Later, Wilson signed a letter prepared by his personal secretary saying that “the President was entirely unaware of the character of the play before it was presented and
Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World
has at no time expressed his approbation of it.” Nevertheless, the film incident, along with the segregation of the federal work force, seriously undermined Wilson’s reputation among African-Americans.
When Wilson became president, his agenda focused exclusively on domestic policy. In his first year in office, with the Underwood Tariff, the Clayton Anti-Trust Act, as well as the creation of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Trade Commission, he had extraordinary success. A little more than a year after the inauguration, however, a political assassination in the far off town of Sarajevo, Bosnia, began a chain of events that would change the president’s and the nation’s focus in succeeding years. After 1914, international matters, far more than his domestic agenda, dominated his administration. Indeed, the assassination in the Austrian Empire in June 1914 can be seen as the ending of the progressive era. In the new era, discussed in the next chapter, international matters are central.
Quick Review Which progressive president had the greatest effect on living and working conditions for the American people? Give three reasons to support your answer.
CONCLUSION
Between 1870 and 1900, America’s population almost doubled, from 40 million in 1870 to 75 million in 1900, with immigration responsible, perhaps, for one-third of this growth. As more and more Americans crowded into the nation’s cities, drawn there by jobs in America’s rapidly expanding industrial economy, a new urgency to focus on the challenges of immigration, urbanization, and industrialization took hold. By 1900, a rising cohort of Americans—including intellectuals, social reformers, and political leaders—seemed to recognize that new ideas and new levels of activism would be needed to create a solid foundation for the country’s future.
Muckraking journalists such as Ida Tarbell, Upton Sinclair, and Lincoln Steffens sought to convince other Americans to heed the call to solve a wide range of problems related to the health and well-being of American society. Some reformers attempted to rein in the excesses of industrialists and the financial markets; others focused their attentions on the urban poor, the nation’s education system, preservation of the natural world, electoral reforms, decent wages for the laboring classes, industrial safety and sanitation, or—in one of the strongest movements—ending the use of alcohol by Americans.
Beginning at the city and state level, progressive reformers sought elected office and sought to use their offices to implement many progressive reforms in the conduct of elections and in the protection of individuals through such things as pure food and drug laws. Theodore Roosevelt, who gained the presidency after the assassination of William McKinley in 1901, successfully brought progressivism to the White House. He expanded the powers of the presidency to control the power of giant corporations, protect the nation’s natural resources, and bring a new vitality to electoral politics. The two presidents who followed him, William Howard Taft and Woodrow Wilson, shared some of Roosevelt s reformist tendencies and furthered the goals of progressivism, changing, in particular, the relationship between business and government in the decades leading up to World War I.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How progressive was the "Progressive Era"? Include the work of individuals, government policy, and philosophy in your answer.
Chapter 19 Progressive Movements, Progressive Politics
Chapter 19 Chapter Review
19.1
THE REVOLT OF THE INTELLECTUALS__________________________
Explain the role of muckraking journalists and intellectuals in shaping a progressive agenda.
Review Questions
1.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the ideas of John Dewey and William Graham Sumner. What assumptions about social and economic inequality underlay each author’s position?
2.	Constructing an Argument
How would you explain the popularity of muckraking journalism in the late 1800s?
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE CITIES
Analyze the changes in urban life that inspired progressive reforms and the impact of those reforms on cities.
Review Questions
3.	Contextualization
Why did many poor and immigrant residents of American cities support political machines? How might such machines have looked from their point of view?
4.	Synthesis
What ideas and objectives underlay progressive reform?
5.	Historical Interpretation
In what ways was Jane Addams’s Hull House typical of the Progressive movement? It what ways did it depart from other progressive initiatives?
19.2
193
RELIGIOUS RESPONSES TO THE GILDED AGE____________________
Explain the main currents of religiously based reform movements during the progressive era.
Review Questions
6.	Historical Interpretation
What light does the rise to prominence of the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union shed on the relationship between social reform and religious revival in the late 1800s?
7.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the strategies and motives of Frances Willard and Carry Nation. How did each contribute to the gains made by the temperance movement?
PROGRESSIVE POLITICS ON THE NATIONAL STAGE_______________
Analyze the three "progressive presidents" and their administrations.
Review Questions
8.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the policies of Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson. What aspects of the progressive agenda did each emphasize?
9.	Historical Interpretation
How did the progressive presidents discussed in this section change the place of the presidential role in American politics?
10.	Historical Interpretation
How did Roosevelt and Wilson respond to the concerns of African-Americans? What light do their actions shed on the issues of race in politics of the late 1800s?
19.4
564 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
War,
Prosperity,
and
Depression
1890-1945
