CHAPTER 12
Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations, 1831-1854
The Changing Face of the American People in the 1840s and 1850s Slavery in the United States, 1840s and 1850s New Strength for American Women
CHAPTER 13
The Politics of Separation, 1850-1861
From Union to Disunion
Bleeding Kansas and DredScott v. Sandford
The Economy, the Panic of 1857, and the Lincoln-Douglas Debates
The Election of 1860 and the Secession of the South
CHAPTER 14
And the War Came: The Civil War, 1861-1865
Fort Sumter to Antietam, 1861-1862 The Road to Emancipation
The Home Front—Shortages, Opposition, Riots, and Battles From Gettysburg to Appomattox and Beyond
CHAPTER 15
Reconstruction, 1865-1877
Federal Reconstruction Policy The Impact of Reconstruction
Terror, Apathy, and the Creation of the Segregated South
12
1831-1854
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how immigration, new debates over slavery, and an activist generation of women shaped the lives of Americans.
THE CHANGING FACE OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN THE
1840s AND 1850s___________________ Analyze how immigration from China, Ireland, and Germany,
as well as the incorporation of Mexican citizens in the ; Southwest, changed the United States.
SLAVERY IN THE UNITED STATES,
1840s AND 1850s_________________________________
Explain how the lives of slaves, slaveholders, and
abolitionists evolved in the decades before the Civil War.
NEW STRENGTH FOR AMERICAN WOMEN
Describe how the women's rights movement developed in
the United States in the 1830s and 1840s.
Living in a Nation ing Lands,

In the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s, the United States became increasingly divided as immigran and native-born Americans flocked to industrial cities of the North, while in the South, cotton-generated wealth created a life of ease for a few based on misery for the many.
In 1848, as word of the discovery of gold in California traveled across Pacific, a young man in Canton, the capital of Guangdong provinc China, wrote, “Good many Americans speak of California....They gold very quickly, so I hear... .1 think I shall go to California next sumn Halfway around the world in a thatched roof cottage in Ireland, a mol was facing the crisis caused by the rotting potato crop and a typhus i demic that had claimed one of her daughters. She told her two remain daughters, “There’s a curse on ould [old] green Ireland and we’ll get ou it.” She saved enough money to send one girl, Tilly, to America and, as sister remembered, “She came to Philadelphia and got a place for gent housework at Mrs. Bent’s.” Tilly saved her money, sent for her sister, i eventually, they were able to bring the rest of their family from Ireland. B sisters worked as housekeepers for decades before retiring comfortably al a lifetime of scrimping and saving. The wave of immigration that brou; people of diverse ethnic backgrounds changed the face of the United Sta dramatically in the 1840s and 1850s.
During the same years, many who had lived in the United States for erations were also going through their own significant changes. Residents the newly expanded country in the Southwest became U.S. citizens as a res of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo without moving at all. Slaves and at litionists were challenging the institution of slavery with a vehemence r.
1844-1877
330
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union
seen before. Slaves rebelled and ran away. Abolitionists—white and black—became more determined to end slavery, not just stop its expansion. In response, slaveholders became more defiant and defensive than ever before. When Abraham Lincoln looked at a nation that was half slave and half free” and wondered if it could survive, he was not alone. Women, who had struggled for rights since the Revolutionary Era, found new voice in the 1830s and 1840s. The Seneca Falls Women’s Rights Convention of 1848 helped to launch a new political movement for women’s rights, including the right to vote. While the right to vote was a key demand of the growing women’s right movement, other women also demanded a broader equality in all aspects of society, insisting that “whatever it is morally right for a man to do, it is morally right for a woman to do.” This chapter takes a look at the changing nature of the country’s racial and ethnic makeup and the thinking of its people, especially about slavery and women’s rights, that took place during the 1840s and 1850s.
THE CHANGING FACE OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN THE
1840s AND 1850s 12.1
Analyze how immigration from China, Ireland, and Germany, as well as the incorporation of Mexican citizens in the Southwest, changed the United States.
Immigration and the nation’s expanding borders increased the population of the United States in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s. A nation of a little fewer than 13 million people in 1830 included 17 million people in 1840, and the United States had 23 million inhabitants in 1850. Births to native-born Americans accounted for the largest part of this increase, but many people also crossed oceans to come to the United States, especially from Ireland, Germany, and China. By 1860, the United States had about 1.5 million Irish-born inhabitants, about 1 million German-born inhabitants, and perhaps 35,000 Chinese-born inhabitants—a number that would grow dramatically in the next few years as more immigrants from China arrived, especially to build the railroads. Desperately poor people in Europe and China fled famines in their home countries. The California Gold Rush and growing U.S. industrialization beckoned with new economic opportunities. Both the push of hunger and oppression and the pull of a better future brought many to the United States.
The extraordinary increase in the area of the United States also incorporated many people who did not move at all. In 1840, the United States included 1.8 million square miles. Less than 10 years later, the country included almost 3 million square miles. Some of the land acquired through the war with Mexico was sparsely populated. However, many people—Mexican Americans in Texas, New Mexico, and California; Mormons in Utah; and the many tribes of Plains and Pueblo Indians—found themselves residing within the United States. As a result, the nature of the U.S. population shifted significantly in the late 1840s.
The United States of 1840 could accurately be described as including three major ethnic groups—Europeans mostly of English stock, Africans of different backgrounds, and American Indians of diverse tribes. Most of the Europeans and many of the Africans were Protestants. By 1850, the nation was much more ethnically diverse with many Asians (mostly Chinese), Irish, Germans, and Mexican-Americans (of mixed European and Indian ancestry). With the growth of these immigrant groups, the United States was also a more Catholic country, and with the coming of so many white immigrants, the percentage of African-Americans in the population shrank even though their actual number grew. While the governing elite was still of European Protestant background, the people who made up the country were more diverse than ever before and increasingly making their presence felt. Political and military changes traced in the previous chapter changed the borders of the United States in the 1830s and 1840s. This chapter traces the parallel changes in the lives of many people who were, by 1850, residents of the United States, whether or not they had been so 20 years before.

1831 William Lloyd Garrison launches	H
The Liberator
t
Nat Turner leads slave revolt in Virginia ?
1833 American Anti-Slavery Society founded
in Boston	r
> I
1836 American Anti-Slavery Society launches i campaign to send antislavery agents to J every state of the union
1838 Sarah Grimke's Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women
1843 Henry Highland Garnet's "Address to the Slaves of the United States of America"
1845-1850 The Great Famine in Ireland
1847	Rebellion against American authorities in Taos, New Mexico
1848	Discovery of gold in California lures immigrants from around the world, including China
Women's Rights Convention at Seneca Falls, New York
1849	Harriett Tubman escapes from slavery
1851	Sojourner Truth's "Ain't I a Woman?" speech
1854 William Lloyd Garrison burns a copy of the Constitution as "source and parent of the other atrocities" of slavery in the United States
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 331
Chinese Immigration Across the Pacific
Many young people in China were fascinated by the stories from across the Pacific. Lee Chew described his neighbor s return to China from the “country of the American wizards,” explaining that the man had earned enough in a short stay in the United States to build a magnificent house and invite his fellow villagers, who lived mostly on rice, to a grand feast with roast pig, chicken, and duck. Soon after, Lee was on his way to California, which became known as Gam Saan (Gold Mountain) on both sides of the Pacific.
Before 1840, only a few hundred Chinese lived in the United States, but in the 1840s and 1850s, Chinese immigrants came to California and to the then-independent Kingdom of Hawaii because of a push from China and also a pull from the United States and Hawaii. Those years were hard in China, especially in Guangdong province where most immigrants originated. Under Chinese law, it was illegal for anyone to leave China, but in desperate times, thousands did. California was one of many destinations. The Opium Wars that began in 1839 spawned great violence as British and Chinese forces battled and as violent feuds erupted between Chinese communities. One Chinese migrant remembered the results of a revolt: “We were left with nothing, and in disillusion we went to Hong Kong to sell ourselves as contract laborers.” The government of the Qing Dynasty, in Beijing, was rapidly losing control of events. It was not strong enough to suppress the civil wars or to prevent the British imposition of the opium trade on China.
In addition, the population of China had also grown from some 200 million in 1762 to 421 million in 1846. With this huge population, land became scarce, rents soared, and many peasants could not maintain their meager land holdings. For all its ancient expertise in rice cultivation, China simply did not have enough land to grow rice for 421 million people. Beginning in 1810, there were terrible famines in China, with some of the worst coming in the 1840s. In those four decades, 45 million people may have starved to death. Poor people begged for admission to soup kitchens or simply died on the doorsteps of the rich. As one immigrant from Guangdong remembered, “Sometimes we went hungry for days... .We had only salt and water to eat with the rice.” Under such conditions, a fresh start in a new place—temporary or permanent—was appealing.
Americans in Hawaii and California saw Chinese laborers as a key to solving a shortage of workers to toil on sugar plantations on Maui or to clear and cultivate land in California. The poorest Chinese peasant workers had long been known as k’u-liy literally “hard strength,” and the western term for Chinese laborers quickly came to be “coolie.” Immediately after the conclusion of the U.S. War with Mexico, a long-time presidential advisor, Aaron H. Palmer, reported to Congress that “No people in all of the East are so well adapted for clearing wild lands and raising every species of agricultural product...as the Chinese.” At first, Chinese immigrants were warmly welcomed in California. An 1852 article in the Daily Alta California noted, “Scarcely a ship arrives that does not bring an increase to this worthy integer of our population.” As a result, the Chinese population in the west grew rapidly. The initial Chinese response to the Gold Rush was relatively small: 325 immigrants from China arrived in California in 1849 and 450 more in 1850. Then the numbers grew rapidly: 2,716 in 1851 and 20,026 in 1852. By 1870, Chinese immigrants represented nine percent of the population of California (but 25 percent of the work force since most Chinese immigrants were men of working age) and larger percentages in Oregon and Washington. The Chinese also made up 29 percent of the much smaller population of Idaho and 10 percent in Montana.
Nearly 95 percent of Chinese immigrants to California before 1870 were male. They tended to see their voyage across the Pacific—a harsh 8-week trip—as a temporary separation from their families in China. United States law dating from 1790 prohibited nonwhite immigrants from achieving citizenship, and most Chinese expected to return
12 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
home after a few years. In the early years, most male Chinese immigrants joined other newcomers in the search for gold. Chinese gold miners could be seen all along the rivers of California in their blue cotton blouses and wide-brimmed hats, shoveling sand into pans or rockers. These men left wives, fiancees, children, and parents behind to find ways to support them. Chinese culture dictated that a woman should stay with her family, especially her husband’s parents, while the man found the means of support. Cultural practices such as these and the cost of travel made immigration difficult for women, though Hawaii was much more welcoming of families than was the United States. Of the few Chinese women who avoided the cultural prohibitions and came to California before 1870, many were forced to work as prostitutes, either lured into the work by false promises or forced into the work by the absence of other ways to survive. In 1870,2,157 of the 3,536 Chinese women in California reported their profession as “prostitute.” Only later did other options open for Chinese women.
As more Chinese entered the gold fields, they encountered growing resistance from white miners. The cry “California for Americans” began in the gold fields and was picked up by many, including the political leaders of the state. In 1852, the California legislature adopted a foreign miners license tax of $3 per month, which was aimed specifically at the Chinese. It provided between a quarter and a half of state revenue before 1870. The tax, and the growing anti-Chinese sentiment that it represented, slowed but did not stop Chinese immigration. As the gold fields became less productive, many Chinese went to work building the railroads. Immediately after the Civil War, 12,000 Chinese laborers laid the tracks of the Central Pacific Railroad. Chinese workers also moved into agriculture, mining, fishing, and later into urban businesses. Men from China often found work at the least desirable jobs or jobs that other men considered to be “women’s work,” including starting the ubiquitous Chinese laundries that were solely a Chinese-American development. Although many individual Chinese immigrants returned home after a few years, other Chinese immigrants stayed in the United States, creating permanent communities in the American West.
between miners of European origin and Chinese miners, were severe, and most Chinese miners were driven fr°m the gold fields before long.
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 333

12.1
Native-born Americans, especially those in the Know Nothing Party, reacted with fear and anger to the surge in immigration to the United States during the 1830s and 1840s. Some of the stereotypes included images of whiskey-drinking Irish and beer-drinking Germans in a country that was turning its back on its own hard drinking ways.
told to say “I know nothing.” In the 1850s, the Know-Nothings elected eight governors, more than 100 members of Congress, mayors in several major cities, and many state legislators. The Know-Nothing Party’s platform was anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant, including plans to limit Catholic political power, in part, by banning immigrants from holding office and requiring them to wait 21 years to become citizens.
Moderate reformers like Horace Mann were horrified by the burning of the Ursuline convent in Boston and the political platform of the Know-Nothings but still sought to ensure that the public school system was used to make all future citizens, especially immigrants, into good “Americans” as they understood the term. Massachusetts Governor Edward Everett told the state’s school board to “save society not with the cannon and the rifle, but with the spelling book, the grammar, and the Bible.” Nevertheless, despite hostility and their own poverty, Irish and German immigrants eventually gained political and economic power in the nation’s major cities.
The Mexican Experience in the Southwest
In 1847, as immigrants to America were trying to fit in to the new culture, Father Antonio Jose Martinez was trying to keep peace in his own community of Taos, New Mexico, where Mexican and Pueblo Indian residents had rebelled against the new American authorities, killing the American appointed governor, Charles Bent. Father Martinez tried to convince rebels that killing Americans was wrong and futile while trying to convince the Americans to give due process to insurgents. He was not fully successful in either effort, but by the end of 1847, the rebellion had ended after a group of rebels were defeated by U.S. soldiers. Like the rebels he was seeking to defend, Father Martinez had suddenly become an American citizen, no longer a citizen of the Republic of Mexico, not because he moved, but because the American border had moved hundreds of miles south and his home was now in a different country.
Under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, territory that was home to Pueblo, Navajo, Comanche, Apache, Ute, and Cheyenne tribes as well as Spanish settlements, some dating back 300 years, was now part of the United States. While in the short
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
run, the treaty had little impact on Native Americans, it almost immediately had a huge impact on people who were now Mexican Americans. The 1848 treaty gave every Mexican citizen within the new boundary of the United States the right to American citizenship or the right to keep Mexican citizenship. Mexico urged its citizens who lived to the north of the new border to move to Mexico, and some 4,000 people from New Mexico and smaller groups from Texas, California, and Arizona did move south, back in to Mexico. But most former Mexican citizens chose to stay in their homes and make new lives as citizens of the United States. Their choice turned out to be a difficult experience for them, however.
Many within the Mexican community in California were initially optimistic about their new country. Indeed, quite a few of the Mexican leaders in California, men such as Mariano Vallejo and Juan Bandini, had been hoping for an American takeover of their territory even before the War with Mexico because they saw the United States as a vibrant democracy that could replace the distant and inept Mexican administration. When the constitutional convention met in Monterey in August 1849 to prepare California for statehood, eight of the 48 voting delegates were Californios (as former Mexican citizens were called). On most matters, they did not vote as a separate bloc, assuming that their interests and those of newer American residents were the same. The huge population surge of the gold rush, however, meant that the Californios quickly became a small minority in California. By the time that statehood came in 1850, they numbered only about 13,000 out of a non-Indian population of over 100,000.
Ultimately, the sheer numbers of those newly arrived from the United States destroyed the economic base for the culture that Mexican citizens like Vallejo represented. Looking back, Vallejo described the impact of statehood and the gold rush on California when “legal thieves, clothed in the robes of the law, took from us our lands and our houses, and without the least scruple, enthroned themselves in our homes like so many powerful kings.” Vallejo’s dreams of being an equal citizen of the United States never materialized.
The vehicle by which the “legal thieves” stole the land of the Californians was established even before statehood was granted: the United States Land Commission was set up specifically to challenge the Mexican land grants on which Vallejo’s and his compatriot’s fortunes rested. Although the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo had promised that all residents of these lands “shall be maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property,” the Land Commission treated every grant as invalid until documented and proven. The result was that many of the old families lost their land. Being of Mexican descent in California meant second-class citizenship for a long time to come.
In Texas, the Mexican, or Tejano, population was also small. Like their counterparts in California, the Tejanos did not fare well after Texas joined the United States. Juan Seguin, one of the heroes on the Texas and American side of the decisive battle of San Jacinto and mayor of San Antonio, eventually joined the exodus to Mexico. In San Antonio, the city with the largest Tejano population, the number of Tejanos elected to office, which had been high under the Republic of Texas, declined sharply once statehood was achieved. New migrants from the United States took over the political and economic control of the state.
The Mexican or Hispano elite in New Mexico fared better because American newcomers remained a minority in New Mexico throughout the 19th century. The Hispano elite were a majority in the first American territorial assembly held in 1851, and they published its proceedings in both Spanish and English. Merchants from the United States had played a significant role in New Mexico since the 1820s when the Santa Fe Trail connected St. Louis with Santa Fe.
Despite the revolts in northern New Mexico after U.S. annexation, many in the territory made their peace with the new government, and some made fortunes in the new economy. Gertrudis Barcelo achieved both fame and fortune for the elegant
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 337
123
12.2
1231 i
Committees of Vigilance
Also known as vigilantes, groups of people who took on extralegal means to assert law and order.
saloon and gambling house she controlled in Santa Fe. Barcelo s saloon was a fixture for Santa Fe Trail traders from the 1820s to the 1850s and a business of sufficient success to allow her to make significant bequests to charity and leave three houses and other wealth to her heirs when she died in 1852. Barcelo was not alone in attending to her own interests whether the flag of Spain, Mexico, or the United States flew on the plaza near her establishment.
For many poor people in the Southwest, however, the transfer of authority from Mexico to the United States meant increased poverty and far less opportunity for justice in a court system that was operated in a strange language by people who were often filled with racial and ethnic prejudices. Not surprisingly, the term vigilante (meaning people who take justice into their own hands rather than rely on lawful authorities) came from the Committees of Vigilance in the California mining camps. Vigilante groups made up of private citizens took the administration of justice into their own hands when they thought that the official government authorities were absent or, too often, when they did not like their decisions. Members of these groups delivered public whippings and lynched people they did not like, whether or not a crime had been committed. California mobs lynched at least 163 Mexicans between 1848 and 1860. In southern California, a white gang known as the El Monte boys used the hysteria around a short-lived Mexican rebellion to settle old scores and attack Mexican families regardless of whether they had been involved in the rebellion. Similar outrages happened across the West. Still, in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, the Latino presence remained strong.
The Mexican American community fought back as it could. One Californio, Joaquin Murrieta, became a California legend—feared in the white community, honored in the Mexican community—because of his vengeance on those who had stolen his gold claim, raped his wife Rosa, and hung his brother. Murrieta stole horses and gold and killed those who had raped and murdered his loved ones before he, in turn, was discovered and killed by the California Rangers in 1853. Kangaroo courts (unauthorized and obviously biased courts) and lynchings were all too common within and across all ethnic lines as traditional community relationships were destroyed by distance and greed.
Quick Review How did native-born Americans react to immigrants in the 1840s and 1850s? How did immigrants react to their new American surroundings?
12.2
SLAVERY IN THE UNITED STATES,
1840s AND 1850s__________________________________ Explain how the lives of slaves, slaveholders, and abolitionists evolved in the decades before the Civil War.
The institution of slavery had existed in the United States from the nation’s beginning, but slavery, which had never been a static institution, changed significantly yet again after 1820 (see Chapter 9). For enslaved people and those who claimed to own them, life in a slave society was a different experience at different points in history. Slavery was always harsh and dehumanizing, but it was harsh in different ways at different times.
After the end of the War of 1812, Southern planters experienced new economic benefits from slavery, benefits that grew with each decade as the world’s cotton market exploded and slave labor, as well as developments in technology and transportation, made it possible and profitable for American slave-grown cotton to satisfy the market. Since most cotton was produced by slave labor, the new demand for cotton greatly increased the value of individual slaves. Thus, just as slavery was dying out in the North—for both economic and ethical reasons—the new cotton economy of the South made slavery far more profitable than ever before. The result
38 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
was a kind of industrialized agriculture that by the 1840s produced 60 percent of the world s cotton and made the South, and particularly some elite Southerners, extremely wealthy. With the increase in profits and wealth, many slaveholders developed what they claimed was a new ethical rationale for slavery and challenged their critics head on (see Map 12-2).
Slaves and Slave Masters
As cotton prices kept increasing in the 1830s, and especially in the 1840s and 1850s, close to a million slaves were moved from the coast, where many had cultivated tobacco, indigo, and other crops, to new cotton states, where they had to learn the different and difficult work of tending cotton. Yet even as slavery was becoming more profitable, Northern public opinion was turning against it. More people were joining what had been a small group of abolitionists in viewing human bondage as a terrible wrong and a stain on the honor of a nation dedicated to human freedom. With slavery disappearing in the North, Northern abolitionists got an increasingly responsive hearing from their neighbors. Other Northerners who had fewer moral qualms about slavery saw slaves as competitors for scarce jobs, and they too joined the opposition to slavery. In 1840, antislavery forces created the Liberty Party and nominated James G. Birney for president, and in 1848, the short-lived antislavery Free Soil Party nominated former President Martin Van Buren as its candidate. Neither party campaigned for outright abolition, only for an end to extending slavery to new areas of the country. Nor did either party win any electoral votes, though
12.1
12.2
12.3
Slavery. In the 30 years before the Civil War, slavery became strongest in the cotton ’ll states of the Deen South For an individual slave, the further north one was, the better one's chances ere to connect to the Underground Railroad, but slaves from every part of the South made their way north > freedom.
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 339
.j——— 12.1
12.2
123
Van Buren did win some 10 percent of the popular vote in 1848. Nevertheless, abolitionist rhetoric and political muscle were frightening an increasingly defensive slaveholding South.
Slaveholders and their political and intellectual allies responded to both the increased profit and the increased criticism. In the past, most slaveholders, including all of those from the South who attended the Constitutional Convention, had defended slavery as a “necessary evil.” Somehow, they argued, slavery had become an economic and social necessity that was, at best, unfortunate. However, after 1830, a new generation of slaveholders began to describe slavery as a positive good, an institution that Christianized “heathen” Africans while providing them with food, shelter, and an ordered life. These new defenders of slavery also contrasted it with work in Northern factories and noted that slaves, unlike factory workers, were not fired when work got slow or they grew old, but rather, were provided for throughout their lives. Southern apologists also became increasingly angry with Northern critics of slavery.
One example of the new proslavery ideology was the changing views of Roger B. Taney, who served as Chief Justice of the United States from 1836 to 1864. As a young attorney in Maryland in 1819, Taney defended a Methodist preacher, Jacob Gruber, who had warned it was inevitable that slaves would “rise up and kill your children, their oppressors....” When Maryland charged Gruber with breaking the peace and inciting rebellion, Taney asserted Gruber’s legal right to free speech and said that slavery was, “a blot on our national character, and every real lover of freedom, confidently hopes that it will be .. .wiped away.”
In 1857, however, almost 40 years after the Gruber trial and 20 years after Taney’s appointment to lead the Supreme Court, he wrote in reference to the Dred Scott decision (see Chapter 13) that blacks were “altogether unfit to associate with the white race, either in social or political relations; and so far inferior, that they had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.” The Chief Justice, like many other Southerners, had come to see slavery as simply the inevitable result of black inferiority. Taney was far from alone.
As every able-bodied slave and every new-born slave child became more valuable from 1800 to the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861, any thought of abolishing slavery disappeared among slaveholders. After 1830, Southern states also made it more difficult to set any slaves free and for free blacks to stay in the South.
The apologists for slavery never tired of pointing out the difference between the supposedly contented life of Southern slaves and the harsh lives of factory workers in the Northern states and Great Britain.
►40 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877

LU
American Voices
Edmund Ruffin, Slavery and Free Labor Described and Compared, ca. 1860
pdmund Ruffin (1794-1865) was a Southern agronomist who in Ethe 1850s turned from improving the productivity of Southern soil to defending Southern slavery. He published several proslavery articles and pamphlets (this one probably in 1860 or 1861), advocated succession of the Southern states after Lincoln's election, and fought in the first battles of the Civil War. At the end of the Civil War, he committed suicide rather than live under what he called "Yankee rule."
The privilege of the English laborer to choose his employment and his master, even when such choice legally exists, does not prevent his service being truly slavery. For he has no choice but to toil incessantly for wages barely affording a scant and wretched support, or to starve—and no change of pursuit, or of service, can make that condition better....[,]n comparison to the English pauper, and even to his earlier condition as the over-worked, under-fed and suffering hireling laborer, supporting a family on regular wages, the general condition of our negro slaves is one of comfort, ease and happiness....
Until recent investigation and discussion had elicited more truth, it had been claimed by the people of the North and by all the opposers of slavery, and even was generally admitted by the people of the Southern States, that the free-labour States of New England were greatly superior to the old Southern States in obtaining the fruits of industry and capita,... .Southern capita, and industry were almost exclusively devoted to agriculture—northern capital was
much more vested in commerce and manufactures, which are deemed much more profitable than agricultural investments....It has also been especially and loudly claimed, for and by the people of the New England States... that such difference was the necessary result of the blighting and demoralizing effects of negro slavery in the South, and of its absence in the North....
Instead of our labors and investments in slave-labor being less profitable than northern operations, it is manifest that the slaveholding States are much richer than the free States, and to make this result the more striking, even if counting every slave as if free, and supposing the whole property to be divided among all the population, (slaves included,) still on this general average, the individual share of every one, bond or free, would be considerably larger than in the free States.
Source: Edmund Ruffin, "Slavery and Free Labor, Described and Compared," Library of Congress, American memory, From Slavery to Freedom: the African-American Pamphlet Collection, 1824-1909, http://memory.loc.gov.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to Ruffin, in what ways was the life of a poor white worker worse than that of a black slave in the South?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In what ways did Ruffin argue slavery was a "positive good"?
12,1
The growing value of individual slaves also led—ironically—to somewhat better treatment for them. A slave life was now of too much economic value to be lost easily.
The same states that made it difficult to free slaves passed new laws against their murder or mistreatment. In many instances, the nutrition and medical care provided for slaves also improved.
A healthy, relatively well-fed slave could work harder than a sickly or starving slave.
A pregnant slave could produce a valuable new slave who could, in time, also work or be sold. However, a slave who died of mistreatment was a lost investment. There is evidence that the actual treatment of slaves, while never approaching anything that could be called humane, did improve throughout the 19th century. Where multiple slave families had been crammed into cramped quarters, more plantation owners built—or had their slaves build—individual family cabins with board floors instead of dirt. More meat was added to slave diets, and slaves were allowed to grow their own vegetable gardens as well as hunt and fish to supplement their diet. Slave hours of work were controlled by custom and unspoken agreement; most slaves had Sunday as a day of rest, and except in harvest time, few were expected to work after dark. A new generation of slave children was allowed to play relatively freely until put to work at age 10 to 12. Former slave Harriet Jacobs wrote, “I was born a slave; but I never knew it till six years of happy childhood has passed away.” For defenders of slavery like Edmund Ruffin, such improvements in the lives of slaves became proof that slave life was better than the lives of some Northern or European workers and peasants.
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 341
Slave quarters, like these shown on a South Carolina plantation, provided better living conditions than what was provided to previous generations of slaves, though hardly anything that could be called comfortable. The houses built close together also fostered a sense of community life that helped enslaved people survive.
The slave population of the United States grew from 1.5 million slaves in 1820 to 4 million slaves in 1860. After 1808, it was illegal and difficult to bring new slaves into the country, so much of this growth reflected reproduction among existing slaves. Many saw this growth as a sign of the new and better treatment that slaves were receiving. In the United States slaves were surviving, reproducing, and providing significant profits to others.
Although some improvements in slave life occurred, there were limits to those developments. The slave cabins were hot and stuffy in summer and inflammable in winter. The meals were monotonous. The work for adults was backbreaking, being called out to work at 4:00 or 5:00 a.m., and then working in hot fields, hoeing or picking cotton, with little break until sunset. Slaves were whipped routinely for falling behind in their work or for infractions of the plantation rules. While some Southern reformers talked of honoring slave marriages, the separation of spouses continued without interruption. Slave women could not protect their own bodies. Harriet Jacobs also remembered that once she came of age, “It was deemed a crime in her to wish to be virtuous.” And she spent considerable time avoiding the constant advances of the owner of her plantation and the jealous anger of his wife. Many slave women were not so fortunate, and the rape of slave women by white men was a commonly acknowledged reality. Mary Boykin Chestnut, wife of a plantation owner, described the treatment of slave women as a “monstrous system,” and noted that “Any lady is ready to tell you who is the father of all the mulatto children in everybody’s household but her own. Those, she seems to think, drop from the clouds.” Even laws that were being passed against murdering a slave could be enforced only if there was a white witness because slaves were not allowed to testify in court. Most of all, nothing could change the fact that slavery was still slavery. No amount of reform or improvement could change that reality.
In the midst of appalling conditions, slaves created lives for themselves and developed the psychological strength to withstand the horrors they faced. Historians have argued whether slave life was better on the small family farms that included only a few slaves or on large plantations with many. In reality, it probably depended on the conditions and the owner of an individual farm or plantation. Slaves on small farms
342 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
V
American Voices
Susan Merritt, Memories of Slavery in the 1850s
1X1
12.2
/h the late 1930s, Susan Merritt was interviewed near Marshall, Texas, not far from where she had once been a slave, by historians working for the Federal Writers' Project. She estimated herself to be 87years old but still remembered slavery all too well.
I couldn't tell how old I is, but does you think I'se ever forget them slave days?...I'se born right down in Rusk County [Texas], not a long way from Henderson, and Massa Andrew Watt am my owner. My pappy, Hob Rollins, he come from North Carolina and belonged to Dave Blakely and Mammy come from Mississippi. Mammy have eleven of us chillen, but four dies when they babies. Albert, Hob, John, Emma, Anna, Lula, and me lives to be grown and married.
Massa Watt lived in a big log house what set on a hill so you could see it round for miles, and us lived over in the field in little log huts, all huddled along together. They have homemade beds nailed to the wall and baling sack mattresses, and us call them bunks. Us never had no money but plenty clothes and grub, and wear the same clothes all the year'round. Massa Watt made our shoes for winter hisself. He made furniture and saddles and harness, and run a grist mill and a whiskey still there on the place. That man had everything.
The hands was woke with the bit bell...They was in that field before day and stay till dusk dark. They work up till Saturday night and then washes their clothes, and sometimes they gets through and has time for the party and plays ring plays....
When the hands come in from the field at dusk dark, they has to tote water from the spring and cook and eat; and be in bed when that old bell rings at nine o'clock. About dusk they calls
the chillen and gives 'em a piece of corn pone about the size my hand and a tin cup milk and puts them to bed. But the growed folks et fat pork and greens and beans and such like and have plenty milk. Every Sunday Massa give 'em some flour and butter and a chicken. Lots...caught a good cowhiding for slippin' round and stealin' a chicken 'fore Sunday. Massa Watt didn't have no overseer...He carry a long whip round the neck and I's seed him tie [slaves] to a tree and cowhide'em till the blood run down onto the ground....
Lots of times Massa Watt give us a pass to go over to George Petro's place or Dick Gregg's place. Massa Petro run a slave market and he have big, high scaffold with steps where he sells slaves. They was stripped off to the waist to show their strength.
Our white folks have a church and a place for us in the back. Sometimes at night us gather'round the fireplace and pray and sing and cry, but us darn't 'low our white folks know it. Thank the Lord us can worship where we wants nowadays.
Source: Susan Merritt, interview, in Norman R. Yetman, editor, Voices From Slavery: WO Authentic Slave Narratives (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2000), pp. 224-226.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
On what aspects of slavery did Merritt focus? How would you characterize her relationship with her master?
2.	Comparison
How might Merritt's life have compared to that of poor Southern whites? How were they similar? How were they different?
12.3
worked alongside the owners and often shared the same meals. But if the owner was
cruel, there was little respite from the suffering, and it was hard to maintain connec-
tions with other slaves. If the owner ran short of funds, and many did, it was all too
easy to cut the food and clothing of the slaves. Working conditions on a large planta-
tion with several hundred slaves could be much harsher, but slaves had more opportu-
nity to create a community and cultural identity of their own, and often, the routines
and expectations were more regularized.
On large plantations, the work life of slaves was usually controlled by an overseer, often a poor white whom the plantation owner hired to get as much work—and profit—from the slaves as possible. Slaves and overseers had to develop a working relationship of sorts, however tense it might be. An overseer who was too lax would not produce the profits an owner expected; one who was too cruel could also be unproductive. The owner of one of Alabama’s larger plantations, A. H. Arrington, wrote in his diary, “I have this day discharged my overseer, Mr. Brewer. I found so much dissatisfaction amongst the negroes that I placed under his charge that I could not feel satisfied to continue him in my employment.” Such decisions were not uncommon. While overseers had total legal control over the slaves, slaves also knew that for any work to get done at all, an accommodation had to be reached
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 343
123
12.2
123
between their white masters and themselves. Slaves knew how to make the most of what power they had. It was risky to complain about an overseer, but it was less risky to feign illness, even pregnancy, and more slaves did that. Some slaves feigned clumsiness and broke tools that then had to be repaired; others pretended laziness and attempted to slow the pace of work. Resistance took many ingenious forms, and it helped slaves survive.
Especially on larger plantations, slave families were also essential to the emotional, and often physical, survival of their members. While slaves were not allowed legally recognized marriages, many slave partnerships lasted for a long time while others were disrupted by the sale of one partner or the tensions that drive people apart in any circumstance. Slave parents, especially mothers, had a difficult task, loving children while also preparing them for the rigors of slavery. Many former slaves recalled parents being especially tough in ways that, as adults, they recognized as the most loving thing slave parents could do. After all, to allow a slave child to grow to adulthood without proper preparation for a world in which submission (at least outward signs of submission) was key to survival was to give that child a death sentence. Some slave mothers simply could not endure the thought of children they loved being raised to be slaves. One former slave told the story of a mother who, after seeing three children sold away from her, gave her fourth child “something out of a bottle” and soon it was dead: “’Couse didn’t nobody tell on her or he’d [the owner] of beat her nearly to death.”
Resisting Slavery
Enslaved people found many different ways to resist their enslavement. For those with no other options, they could pretend illness, laziness, or stupidity to resist their circumstances. Slave labor could be notoriously slow when slaves actively tried to subvert the work of a plantation, doing just enough work to avoid punishment. But passive resistance was not the only kind of resistance. Newspaper advertisements for runaway slaves give solid evidence that thousands and thousands of slaves tried to run away from the places where they were held. While many runaways were caught, many tried again and again to find shelter in free states of the North or in Canada, and quite a few succeeded. And finally, in every generation, there were full-scale slave revolts, some small and some large, in which enslaved people attacked their oppressors and sought to claim their freedom.
RUNAWAY SLAVES
In 1837, Joseph Taper and his family ran away from their lives as slaves on a Virginia plantation. It was a dangerous decision to do so. The chances of being caught were great and the punishments harsh—perhaps flogging, perhaps having the family separated and sold into the Deep South, farther from the opportunity for a second escape, perhaps being killed. At first, the Tapers made their way to Pennsylvania where Joseph Taper found work. But when he read the offer of a reward for his return, the family moved further north and eventually left the United States for Canada in 1839. Britain had abolished slavery in all its dominions in 1833, making it illegal for slave hunters to seek former slaves there. In November 1840, a year after their arrival in Canada, Joseph Taper wrote of his journey “that I am in a land of liberty, in good health... .My wife and self are sitting by a good comfortable fire happy, knowing that there are none to molest or make afraid.”
As happy as the Taper story was, the long and dangerous journey north was frightening for any slave who sought to escape. Harriet Jacobs escaped from slavery by boat in 1843. She remembered that even after she was safely on the boat,
“We were filled with constant apprehensions that the constables would come on board. Neither could I feel quite at ease with the captain...might he not be tempted to make more money by giving us up to those who claimed us as property?”
44 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
But she was relieved when, the next morning I was on deck as soon as the day dawned...for the first time in our lives, on free soil.” Nevertheless, though she had successfully escaped from slavery, Jacobs remembered the next days as difficult ones. She was lonely, having left dear ties behind us; ties cruelly sundered by the demon Slavery.”
Ihe Taper and Jacobs stories are unusual. Most slaves who ran away were quickly caught. The route to freedom in the North was known as the Underground Railroad, a highly secret system of safe havens and supporters that guided slaves toward a new, free life. It was a symbol for many but a reality for only a few. Nevertheless, every year more and more slaves were aided by “conductors” who were either former slaves who had run away or free people, black and white, who hated slavery and were willing to take enormous risks to help new people on the road to freedom. Conductors on the Underground Railroad knew the hidden paths and the safe houses where sympathetic owners were willing to hide runaway slaves as they journeyed ever further north, either to cities in the United States or, increasingly, out of the United States to Canada. Both Taper and Jacobs were among the few slaves who were literate, which helped them elude the authorities and prosper. But they were not nearly so unusual in deciding to run away from slavery.
Advertisements that appeared in Southern newspapers in the 19th century offered considerable detail about runaway slaves. One 1850 issue of the New Orleans Daily Picayune reported the offer of rewards for Jack, Sam, Zip or Harry, Edward, Daniel, Henrietta, Mary Mackendish, William, and Tom. By 1860, some 50,000 slaves ran away every year out of a total slave population of 4 million who were held by 385,000 slave owners, which meant that one in seven slaveholders could expect someone to run away each year.
Runaway slaves became abolitionists and, later, national leaders during Reconstruction. Henry Highland Garnet, whose adult writing inspired fear in the hearts of many slaveholders, was born a slave in Maryland. While he was a child, his
12,1
12.2
Underground Railroad
Support system set up by antislavery groups in the upper South and the North to assist fugitive slaves in escaping the South.
12 J
By far the most famous conductor on the Underground the perhaps 300 people she led north out of slavery, ran again and again to lead others to freedom.
Railroad, Harriet Tubman, shown here with a few of away from slavery and then returned to the South
i
Chapter 12 Living in a
Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 345
L-
123
12,2
123
family set out on the pretext of going to the funeral of a slave on a nearby plantation but went instead to the home of a Quaker Underground Railroad conductor in Delaware who started them on the road to freedom in New York City where each member of the family took a new name in a ceremony of baptism to Liberty.
Frederick Douglass was born a slave in Maryland around 1817. Douglass remembered visits from his mother who lived on another plantation 12 miles away and made the journey on foot at night before returning for the next day’s work: “She was a field hand, and a whipping is the penalty for not being in the field at sunrise.. .1 do not recollect of ever seeing my mother by the light of day.”
Douglass made his first attempt to run away in 1835 but was caught and sent to a former master in Baltimore. Instead of giving in to the fear of capture, Douglass tried again 3 years later and succeeded in running away to freedom in New York in 1838.
Harriet Tubman became famous as a slave who not only ran away but also returned to the South and guided between 200 and 300 others along the Underground Railroad to freedom. By most reckonings, she was responsible for freeing more slaves than any other person in the institution’s long history.
Tubman was born about 1820. Two of her older sisters were sold to a plantation farther south, and Tubman never shook her own fears of a similar fate. She almost died at the age of 14 from a severe head injury when an overseer threw a 2-pound weight at another slave but hit Tubman instead. In 1844, she married John Tubman, a free black who lived nearby. (Marriages of slaves and free blacks were uncommon, but not unknown.) The free husband thought his wife worried too much about being a slave. In 1849, Tubman made her way north to Philadelphia without her husband or other help and found work as a domestic. She recalled, “I was free; but there was no one to welcome me to the land of freedom.” Everyone she knew and cared for was “down in the old cabin quarters, with the old folks and my brothers and sisters.”
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Understanding Advertisements for Runaway Slaves
n December 22, 1848, the following advertisement appeared in the Baltimore Sun:
FIFTY DOLLARS
REWARD—Ran away from the subscriber, on the 10th inst [this month], a MAN named Celus, calls himself Celus Dorsey, about 23 years old, slender made, about 5 feet, 7 or 8 inches high, dark complexion, rather thick lip; he has a large scar on one of his hands from a burn. It is probable he is lurking about Baltimore. I will give the above reward if taken out of the State, and $30 if taken in the State, and secured so I get him again. SAML C. HUNT,
10 miles from Baltimore, on Baltimore and Susquehanna Railroad Historians have found hundreds of similar advertisements in newspapers in slaveholding states from the American Revolution to the middle of the Civil War. Each advertisement tells a small part of the story of someone who had the opportunity and
the courage to run away from slavery and the slaveholder's determination to see him or her returned.
Source: Baltimore Sun, December 22,1848.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
What does Hunt's location tell us? What opportunity would a slave living further from a city have to run away? Why might Hunt have thought that Dorsey was "lurking around Baltimore"? Was there something about a city, even in a slaveholding state, that might attract a slave?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Why were slaveholders so willing to advertise about runaway slaves and let others know that enslaved people were running away as often as the advertisements imply? What might be lost and what might be gained for a slave owner by posting such advertisements?
w
346 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Tubman decided that the best solution was to bring the rest of her family to freedom, though she never rejoined her free husband.
Having successfully brought most of her family north, Tubman developed a pattern that she would continue until the Civil War. She worked for a while, raised some money, and then made a trip south to free a group of slaves. Between 1850 and 1861, Tubman made trip after trip, helping slaves escape and taking them north. As the full impact of the 1850 Fugitive Slave Law took effect, she did not stop in Pennsylvania but accompanied each group to Canada. As Tubman’s fame grew, it earned her the support of Northern abolitionists and the hatred of many slaveholders. The reward for her capture grew steadily, but she kept returning south to free more people. Northern abolitionists supported her work, and in 1859, the Unitarian minister Thomas Wentworth Higginson took up a collection at the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society so that Tubman could “resume the practice of her profession!”
REBELS AND SLAVE REVOLTS
Although slaveholders typically claimed that their slaves were happy and content, the number of slaves who ran away undermined those claims. On some level, slaveholders were aware of the reality because, as much as they sought to catch runaway slaves, they most intensely feared the possibility of a slave revolt. Slave revolts were relatively rare, but they did happen. Historians have documented over 200 slave revolts in the United States in the 60 years before the Civil War. Some were little more than small-scale events on a single plantation; others were much larger. On August 30, 1800, Gabriel Prosser led over 1,000 slaves in a planned attack on Richmond, Virginia (see Chapter 7). In 1810, plans for a revolt were discovered in Lexington, Kentucky. In 1811, 400 slaves revolted in New Orleans. And in 1815, a white man named George Boxley attempted to lead a slave revolt in Virginia. In 1822, Denmark Vesey and his supporters planned to burn the military and financial center of Charleston, South Carolina, murder the white residents, and then seize the city’s caches of weapons and gold. They would then set sail for a new life of freedom in Haiti. Vesey, who had purchased his own freedom in 1800, had been plotting his revolt for years. He led a Bible class in Charlestown for the African Methodist Episcopal Church, and he spoke of the biblical stories of moving from slavery to freedom with the passion of a latter-day
Moses. He also spoke fluent French and was clearly influenced by the success of the Haitian slave revolt. No one really knows how close Vesey came to success before his plot was betrayed. Some estimated that his co-conspirators numbered in the thousands, making it one of the largest slave revolts. In stories whispered behind closed doors,
Vesey and his followers represented the ultimate terror to the white community.
In 1831, Nat Turner led a revolt that was more successful than Vesey’s. Terror spread throughout the South when Turner s forces killed over 60 slave-owning whites before the revolt was defeated by state and federal troops. Over 100 slaves were killed in the fighting or executed after capture. Turner himself was captured and interviewed bY his white, court-appointed attorney, Thomas Gray, before he was executed. Gray subsequently published an account of the conversation as The Confessions of Nat Turner.
Turner reported having been a religious man from his earliest years. His prayers and meditations convinced him of three things: “that I was ordained for some great purpose in the hands of the Almighty,” that the Almighty’s purpose included freedom for American slaves, and that “the great day of judgment was at hand.”
It was some time after the revolt before Nat Turner was captured.
In spite of his capture, his actions had already sent fear through the slaveholding South.
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 347
12.1
12.2
123
In the aftermath of the Turner revolt, Southern fears increased, and repressive laws were passed across the South, including laws making it illegal to teach a slave to read and write to prevent others like Turner from studying the Bible and other information on their own. In the slave quarters, however, Turner became a legend, and stories of his exploits were told and retold. Despite the consequences, the revolts continued.
Some Northern blacks also called for slave uprisings. David Walker, who was born free in Ohio, published his Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World in Boston in 1829. Walker’s goal was “To awaken in the breasts of my afflicted, degraded and slumbering brethren, a spirit of inquiry and investigation respecting our miseries and wretchedness in this Republican Land of Liberty!!!!!!” Walker also asked white Americans, will God “let the oppressors rest comfortably and happy always?” But the primary audience for Walker’s Appeal was among his fellow African-Americans to whom he said, “The whites want slaves, and want us for their slaves, but some of them will curse the day they ever saw us.”
In his 1843 “Address to the Slaves of the United States of America,” Henry Highland Garnet also did not mince words. He said to the slaves of the South,
Brethren, arise, arise! Strike for your lives and liberties. Now is the day and the hour....Let your motto be resistance! Resistance! RESISTANCE!
For Garnet and Walker, the time was long past for aiding individual escapes or agitating for a constitutional end to slavery; they were ready for direct action.
The Liberator
A newspaper dedicated to the antislavery cause launched by William Lloyd Garrison in 1831.
American Anti-Slavery Society
Founded in Boston in 1833, the society was dedicated to the abolition of slavery.
White Abolitionists
In the first issue of his newspaper The Liberator, published in 1831, William Lloyd Garrison declared, “I am in earnest—I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I will not retreat a single inch. -AND I WILL BE HEARD.” Over the next 35 years until the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment ending slavery in the United States in 1865, Garrison never backed down. He was a loner who alienated most people who tried to work with him. Nevertheless, in 1833 he was one of the key members in launching the American Anti-Slavery Society in Boston, which, like The Liberator, was committed to the total abolition of slavery everywhere in the United States, and for a third of a century, he kept the issue of slavery in front of a white society that often did not want to hear about it. Garrison’s role in the abolitionist movement can hardly be overstated.
In the 1830s, Garrison was already a believer in the “free labor” doctrine that the Republican Party would adopt in the 1850s. He contrasted Northern free labor, which provided opportunities for anyone to gain the economic independence so important to freedom, and Southern slavery, which created a rigid hierarchy of wealthy elites, poor whites, and enslaved blacks.
Garrison was not a church member, but he modeled himself on the image of an Old Testament prophet, and he saw the considerable abuse that was heaped on him over many years as proof of his own righteousness. Other abolitionists, white and black, also were subject to considerable abuse. In 1835, Garrison himself was almost lynched in Boston. In New York City, Lewis and Arthur Tappan, highly successful merchants, were also shunned for their abolitionist activity. And in Alton, Illinois, on the Mississippi River opposite the slaveholding state of Missouri, Elijah Lovejoy was killed by a mob in 1837 after he had set up a small printing press to publish antislavery literature. Despite his status as a loner, Garrison did befriend other abolitionists and runaway slaves. He helped launch Frederick Douglass on his remarkable career as an abolitionist leader, though the two differed on many issues.
On the fourth of July in 1854, at a sunny afternoon picnic of the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society in Framingham, Massachusetts, Garrison burned a copy of the
348 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
hated Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 that required all citizens to help return escaped slaves to those who claimed them. As it burned, Garrison shouted, And let all the people say, Amen. It was not a surprising action at an antislavery rally, but when the crowd roared its response, Garrison also held up a copy of the United States Constitution—a sacred document to many and called it the source and parent of the other atrocities” because of its clauses that protected slavery and set it on fire, too. And again the crowd responded to his call for an “Amen.” For all his radicalism, Garrison was also a pacifist. He always insisted that his goal was “to accomplish the great work of national redemption through the agency of moral power,” not force. While he argued that events like Nat Turner’s bloody rebellion were inevitable, he could never condone violence, even the violence of the Civil War, to end slavery.
Garrison may have crusaded independently, but many other white Americans were joining forces as abolitionists in the 1830s and 1840s, and especially after the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act in 1850. What came to be known as “Oberlin abolitionism” emerged from the revivals that Charles Grandison Finney led in upstate New York in the 1820s. In May 1836, the American Anti-Slavery Society began a campaign to evangelize the nation for abolitionism. What was needed, the society’s leaders decided, were antislavery revivalists who modeled their activities on the work of religious revivalists. Funds would be raised to send out at least 70 organizers to preach the sin of slavery and the need for the repentance of abolitionism. Theodore Dwight Weld, who had begun his career working with Finney, was commissioned to choose the agents.
Weld turned to his old classmates from theology school, especially now that many of them were seeking their first appointments as ministers. Eventually, 30 of the 54 students who had been part of Weld’s class at Lane Seminary in the early 1830s became antislavery agents. They carried revivalism and activism to all the free states of the union.
In the 1840s and 1850s, 12 to 15 percent of all Americans were slaves like Susan Merritt or former slaves like John Taper. Most Americans held some opinion about the condition of slaves, and increasingly, activists on both sides of the issue were taking strong stands. Some, including Edmund Ruffin, were defenders of slavery; others such as William Lloyd Garrison, David Walker, and Sarah Grimke were its opponents. But almost no Americans were completely free of economic ties to slavery or were able to ignore its impact on American culture and politics. Slaves produced cotton, which clothed most Americans and fueled the nation’s economy. By the 1850s, the issue of slavery also dominated American politics. Whatever one s place in society and one’s point of view, slavery was a central issue and topic of debate. It would not go away.
0 Quick Review In what different ways did enslaved people and their free allies, white and black, resist the institution of slavery and help individuals escape from it? How did apologists for slavery respond to the growing criticism of the institution that emerged in the 1830s and 1840s? What do the numbers of slaves who ran away say about the defense of slavery?
Oflll not oxcf se! M
| lam in earnest! b
This banner announced the publication of a new journal, The Liberator, dedicated entirely to the complete abolition of slavery in all parts of the United States.
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 349
12.1
NEW STRENGTH FOR AMERICAN WOMEN___________________________
Describe how the women's rights movement developed in the United States in the 1830s and 1840s.
123
122
123
Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions
The resolutions passed at the Woman's Rights Convention at Seneca Falls in 1848 calling for full equality, including the right to vote, for women.
On July 20, 1848, 68 women and 32 men signed a Declaration of Sentiments and Resolutions at the end of their 2-day meeting in Seneca Falls, New York. The document—which followed the form of the Declaration of Independence—is often viewed as the opening statement of the womens rights movement in the United States. This declaration stated,
We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men and women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Then, just as Jefferson listed grievances against George III, those who gathered in upstate New York offered their grievances against the male-dominated culture in which they lived. Their document made history and achieved far more recognition than its authors ever imagined. But the Seneca Falls convention would likely not have happened without the work of others who began to question women’s roles in the decades before the convention, and the work of the those at the convention still depended on the continued efforts of supporters to fight for change.
New Ideas about Women's Rights
The 1848 convention of women at Seneca Falls was not the first time women in the United States began to lobby for their rights. Although hardly a feminist in todays terms, Abigail Adams had reminded her husband, John, that the framers of a new government in 1776 should “remember the ladies.” In 1838, the abolitionist and feminist Sarah Grimke published Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women, portions of which she first published in Garrisons The Liberator and which she originally addressed to the Boston Female Anti-Slavery Society. In the 1838 book she argued that in the present “condition of women in my own country,” well-off women were “taught to regard marriage as the one thing needful, the only avenue to distinction,” while “in those employments which are peculiar to women, their time is estimated at only half the value of that of men.” Grimke also argued that men suffered from the assumption that they alone needed to support families while she believed they would ultimately find greater happiness in seeing women “as their equal” even if that view did not come easily to them.
Few women symbolized the strong links between feminism and abolitionism as did Sarah and Angelina Grimke, sisters from South Carolina. Born to a prosperous South Carolina slaveholding family, both women broke with their family over the issue of slavery. By 1836, the sisters had become the first female representatives of the American Anti-Slavery Society, based in New York City. They had also become ardent feminists. In 1838, Angelina married another abolitionist, Theodore Dwight Weld. For most of the rest of their lives, Weld and the two sisters lived together and campaigned to end slavery, racism, and sexism in society.
Sarah Grimke wrote Letters on the Equality of the Sexes after she and her sister were criticized for giving public lectures on the antislavery cause. The ministers and others who criticized the sisters might have been sympathetic to the women’s antislavery views, but they thought women had no place speaking in public to a group that included women and men. Sarah had no intention of backing down on either topic. She began her Letters, “Here I plant myself. God created us equal:” Then, focusing on women’s rights, she continued:
All history attests that man has subjected woman to his will, used her as a means to promote his selfish gratification, to minister to his sensual pleasures, to be instrumental in promoting his comfort; but never has he desired
350 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
to elevate her to that rank she was created to till. He has done all he could to debase and enslave her mind; and now he looks triumphantly on the ruin he has wrought, and says, the being he has thus deeply injured is his inferior....
To me it is perfectly clear that WHATEVER IT IS MORALLY RIGHT FOR A MAN TO DO, IT IS MORALLY RIGHT FOR A WOMAN TO DO... she is clothed by her Maker with the same rights, and.. .the same duties.
Grimke’s Letters were in circulation a decade before the meeting at Seneca Falls, but that gathering brought the cause of women’s rights to a much larger audience. Because it brought together such powerful women as Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and many others—soon joined by others including Susan B. Anthony and Matilda Gage—Seneca Falls provided the foundation for a half-century long campaign for women’s rights and specifically women’s suffrage.
The Seneca Falls Convention Shapes a Movement
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott were the organizers of the 1848 Seneca Falls Women's Rights Convention that brought the cause of women’s rights to the attention of many. Stanton and her family had come to rural Seneca Falls, New York, only the previous year. They missed life in their former home in Boston but thought Seneca Falls would provide a rest. However, Elizabeth found life in Seneca Falls difficult and lonely.
In the summer of 1848, Lucretia Mott, already a well-known Quaker abolitionist and reformer, and her husband James were visiting Seneca Falls as part of a trip to the nearby Seneca Indian tribe and to former slaves now living as free people across the border in Canada. Stanton visited Mott and poured out her frustration. Mott had similar grievances. Both women had long been active in the antislavery cause. Henry B. Stanton, Elizabeth’s husband, was a well-known abolitionist, and he and Elizabeth had traveled widely in the service of the cause. Stanton and Mott had both attended the World Anti-Slavery Convention in London in 1840 with their husbands. At that gathering, all of the women were excluded from any speaking role. As they talked about it in 1848, Stanton and Mott decided, “then and there, to call a ‘Woman’s Rights Convention’” for the following week.
Ihe Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls generated far more attention-most of it negative—than the organizers expected. Stanton remembered, “All the journals from Maine to Texas seemed to strive with each other to see which could make our movement appear most ridiculous.” Looking back on the hostility that the convention generated, Stanton said, “If I had had the slightest premonition of all that was to follow that convention, I fear I should not have had the courage to risk it.
Not all the responses were hostile, however. The abolitionist Frederick Douglass attended the Seneca Falls gathering and spoke in favor of, and signed, the declaration. Abolitionists were used to hostility, and much of the abolitionist press supported the Seneca Falls statement, launching an important alliance between abolitionists and advocates for women’s rights. Stanton, Mott, and many like them were abolitionists first who then added women’s rights to their concerns, in part, because of their exclusion from leadership positions in the abolitionist movements and, in part, because they saw the rights of enslaved people and new freedoms for women as part of the same reform effort. Douglass and many male abolitionists were also among the strongest supporters of women’s rights. And many of the most determined opponents of one movement also opposed the other.
Reports of the Woman’s Rights Convention at Seneca Falls caught the attention of other women and subsequent conventions were held across New York state and in Massachusetts, Ohio, Indiana, and Pennsylvania. Among those who heard the news of the Seneca Falls convention were Susan B. Anthony and Matilda Joslyn Gage. Anthony was a teacher in Rochester, New York, and active in temperance and antislavery reforms.
Seneca Falls Women's Rights Convention
A significant convention demanding women's equality in legal rights, held in upstate New York in 1848.
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 351
122
122
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony became lifelong friends soon after the Woman's Rights Convention at Seneca Falls and, in spite of occasional disagreements, worked together for almost half a century to fight for women's right to vote.
Gage gave birth to a son just before the Seneca Falls meeting and could not attend. Both of these women quickly became friends with Stanton and fellow leaders of the women’s rights movement for over half a century. They also joined as editors of the first three volumes of History of Woman Suffrage published between 1881 and 1886. The gathering at Seneca Falls, the declaration that the convention issued, and the movement that followed became far more than the small band of organizers dared hope for when they gathered on those hot summer days.
A
Growing Women's Rights Movement Women continued to lead campaigns to open other doors to women during the years after the convention at Seneca Falls. Some collaborated with the Seneca Falls leaders and some worked on their own. When Lucy Stone graduated from Oberlin College in 1847—Oberlin and Antioch were among the first American colleges to admit women as students—she was chosen as the commencement speaker but was told that a man would have to read her speech because it was not appropriate for women to speak to mixed audiences. In response, she refused to write one. In 1855, when she married Henry B. Blackwell, Stone insisted on keeping her own name, a huge break with tradition. Stone’s Oberlin friend and sister-in-law Antoinette Brown Blackwell was the first woman ordained as a Protestant minister in 1851. In 1849, Elizabeth Blackwell, sister-in-law to both women, became the first woman awarded an M.D. degree.
Another reformer, Amelia Bloomer, who had participated in the Seneca Falls convention and served as a temperance lecturer, embraced a different kind of freedom for women when in 1851 she popularized a kind of trousers that women might wear instead of the cumbersome hoop skirts that were expected of all middle-class women.
Other women demanded other kinds of rights. One of the most important issues for many women was the right to control their own property. In nearly all the states before the 1830s, a married woman’s husband controlled all of the couple’s property. Women fought such rules, and after the Panic of 1837, in which many women saw their life savings disappear because of a husband’s bankruptcy, their voices began to be heard. Mississippi was the first state to pass laws specifically allowing women to keep the property they brought into their marriages. The 1839 law said that property that women had before a marriage or inherited during a marriage—including slaves—could not be controlled by their husbands. Michigan passed a law in 1844 that protected a women’s property from a husband’s creditors, and in the 1840s and 1850s, other states followed. In Texas and other states that had once belonged to Mexico, Spanish-era laws had long given women the rights to control their own property, and those rights were incorporated into the new American legal systems.
In the 1830s, other women formed antiprostitution societies to protect women from being forced into such work. Additional reformers of the 1830s became advocates for dietary reform, including Mary Gove Nichols, who along with Sylvester Graham (of Graham crackers) advocated a healthier diet free of alcohol, coffee, meat, sugar, and spices.
Advocates for the rights of women also had their differences with one another. Some of the most intense differences came over the issue of divorce. Frances (Fanny) Wright, who had been influenced by Robert Owen’s ideas about an ideal community (see Chapter 10), represented an extreme view of the topic. Wright tried to create her
352 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
own utopian community at Nashoba, Tennessee, where she advocated that the best way to end slavery and the racial prejudice that maintained it was to promote interracial unions that would produce a new breed of Americans. Even after the failure of Nashoba, Wright continued to argue that the institution of marriage was a barrier to women’s equality. More moderate women, including Elizabeth Cady Stanton, argued that marriage was a simple legal contract, not a sacred institution, and that at least in the case of a husband who was a drunkard or abusive, divorce should be easy. Others disagreed, not only those hostile to women’s rights but also leaders of the women’s movement such as Antoinette Brown Blackwell.
The links between the women’s rights and antislavery efforts, important as they were, were not without their tensions. Some African-American women felt those tensions especially deeply. As early as 1832, the first female antislavery society in the United States was created by African-American women in Salem, Massachusetts. White women soon followed with their own societies in a number of large cities, but black women were often reluctant to join the integrated societies in which white women nearly always claimed all of the leadership roles. At a women’s rights convention in Akron, Ohio, in 1851, Sojourner Truth asked, “May I say a few words?” Truth was already a nationally recognized figure. She had been born a slave in New York State in 1799 but was freed by the New York Emancipation Act of 1827. She took the name Sojourner Truth and traveled across the nation demanding freedom for her fellow Americans of African origin. She told the convention:
I have as much muscle as any man, and can do as much work as any man. I have plowed and reaped and husked and chopped and mowed, and can any man do more than that? I have heard much about the sexes being equal. I can carry as much as any man, and can eat as much too, if I can get it. I am as strong as any man....But man is in a tight place, the poor slave is on him, woman is coming on him, he is surely between a hawk and a buzzard.
The "bloomers" that Amelia Bloomer popularized were much more than a fashion statement.They essentially meant that women could wear pants, liberating them from the long hoop skirts that were virtually required wear for middle-class women and that made any sort of activity, from walking upstairs to physical activity out of doors, extremely difficult.
Versions of the speech published later added the famous refrain “And ain’t I a woman?” In that speech, Truth linked the antislavery and women’s rights campaigns, telling those who opposed that link that they would indeed be caught between a hawk and a buzzard” if she had anything to do with it.
A
Quick Review What did the women's and abolitionist movements have in common? How did the two movements build on each other?
CONCLUSION
In the decades leading up to the Civil War, the United States grew in area and in population. From 1830 to 1850, the number of people living in the United States almost doubled, from fewer than 13 million to more than 23 million. Rising birth rates among native-born Americans fueled the largest proportion of this growth, but other forces also sent U.S. population statistics upward. Immigrants, particularly from China, Ireland, and Germany, contributed to the rise as did the multitudes of new residents acquired when the United States gained new territory after its war with Mexico. Responding to 3 variety of push-and-pull factors, immigrants flocked to America to escape hardships
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 353
at home and to pursue economic opportunity on American soil as domestics, farmers, miners, railroad workers, builders, and factory laborers. In many cases, native-born Americans did not take well to immigrants, seeing them as a threat to their own jobs and quality of life. The country’s growing diversity brought new tensions.
Large territorial gains, ceded to the United States under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848 and purchased from Mexico by U.S. diplomat James Gadsden in 1853, stretched the nation’s borders farther south and west, bringing many Spanish-speaking people, as well as Plains and Pueblo Indians, into the country. Although the treaties had promised that these residents would be respected and allowed to continue living in the areas, Americans who flocked into those regions generally pushed out those who were already there, leaving them in much more marginal positions.
Changes in fashion, technology, and transportation led to cotton’s becoming a highly profitable crop in the 19th century, more profitable with each succeeding decade. Its cultivation spread across the lower South, transforming the Southern economy and the dynamics of slavery. The slave population also surged during this time, increasing from 1.5 million to 4 million between 1820 and 1860. By 1840, the American South was the leading producer of cotton in the world, and plantation owners, eager to exploit the rising demand for the crop, moved slaves into new cotton-growing regions to work in the fields from dawn to dusk. This new cotton economy made slavery in the South far more profitable than ever before. Slave owners justified the institution of slavery as a “positive good” wherein slaves were thought to be better off being provided for on plantations than left to fend for themselves. Slaves, through open revolt, escape, and other less dramatic means, resisted their enslavement. Abolitionists in the North—white and black—also resisted slavery, campaigning against the institution with renewed vehemence that heightened sectional tensions.
Women, who were also struggling for full rights as citizens, launched a suffrage movement at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848 and a campaign for full rights in all areas of society. Many women and some men saw a link between freedom from slavery and the emancipation of women, and they agitated tirelessly for both causes, even though others of both sexes renounced their efforts.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
Which changes in the United States had the greatest impact on emerging social movements in the 1840s and 1850s? You may want to consider immigration, the growth of both antislavery and proslavery propaganda, and the campaign for equal rights for women in your answer.
354 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Chapter 12 Chapter Review
THE CHANGING FACE OF THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN THE
1840s AND 1850s_____________________________________ B
Analyze how immigration from China, Ireland, and Germany, as well as the incorporation of Mexican citizens in the Southwest, changed the United States. Review Questions
1. Historical Interpretation
What forces pushed Chinese immigrants to leave their homeland? What forces pulled them toward California?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the place of Irish immigrants in American society before and after the Great Famine of 1845-1850. How would you explain the differences you note?
3.	Chronological Reasoning
How did life change for Hispanic elites living in California, Texas, and New Mexico after the absorption of those territories into the United States? What explains the changes you note?
SLAVERY IN THE UNITED STATES,
1840s AND 1850s 12.2
Explain how the lives of slaves, slaveholders, and abolitionists evolved in the decades before the Civil War.
5.	Contextualization
How did slaves build lives and communities of their own within the institution of slavery?
6.	Historical Interpretation
How would you explain the growth of antislavery sentiment in the North after 1830? What connections do you see between the rise of the abolitionist movement and the changing nature of the Southern defense of slavery?
12.3
>
!
NEW STRENGTH FOR AMERICAN WOMEN
Describe how the women's rights movement developed in the United States in the 1830s and 1840s.
Review Questions
7.	Historical Interpretation
What links were there between the abolitionist and women’s rights movements of the 1840s and 1850s? How would you explain the connections you note?
8.	Chronological Reasoning
Why was the Seneca Falls convention such an important turning point in the history of the struggle for women’s rights?
Review Questions
4.	Chronological Reasoning
How did the nature of slavery change between 1800 and 1850? How would you explain the changes you note?
Chapter 12 Living in a Nation of Changing Lands, Changing Faces, Changing Expectations 355
1850-1861
13
The Politics of
	
C H A P T E R O B J E C T I VE
Demonstrate an understanding of the growing split between the North and the South that led to secession and civil war.
wSKasasaassBM
FROM UNION TO DISUNION
Leaflets like this reflected the outrage many northerners felt in response to the capture and reenslavement of African Americans that resulted from the passage of a tougher fugitive slave law.
Analyze the political jockeying in Congress and how reaction to the Fugitive Slave Act and the publication of Unde Toms Cabin, changed the opinions of many Americans—South and the North—making a break between them hard to avoid.
BLEEDING KANSAS AND DRED SCOTT V. SANDFORD
Analyze the causes and consequences of the battle over slavery in Kansas and the Supreme Court's decision in the Dred Scott case and the impact of those events on public opinion.
THE ECONOMY, THE PANIC OF
AND THE LINCOLN-DOUGLAS DEBATES
Explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide. FROM JOHN BROWN TO THE SECESSION OF THE SOUTH
Analyze the political impact of John Brown's raid and why Lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and the southern states then voted to leave.
356 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union,
While thousands of Americans, along with Asians and Europeans, were pouring into California in search of gold, other Americans were attacking or defending slavery. These two seemingly separate issues came to a head in Congress in 1850. Because of its rapid gold-rush-inspired growth, President Taylor advocated statehood for California from the time that he took office in 1848, and in 1849, Californians adopted a state constitution and applied for statehood only 1 year after the United States acquired it from Mexico. The territory far exceeded the minimum population threshold for statehood, but there was a problem: although the admission of California as a free state would once again restore the carefully crafted balance of free and slave states, evening out the numbers after the balance in the Senate had been disrupted by admitting Texas as a slave state, other future free states might follow, which threatened those in the South. Contrary to some expectations, the U.S. War with Mexico had not produced another slave state for the Union after Texas. Admitting California as a free state would restore the balance in the Senate that had been the rule since the Missouri Compromise of 1820 and that the admission of Texas hah disrupted in 1846, leading to 15 slaves states represented, but only I4&ee states. Many in the North and South thought a balance was essential to maintaining the Union. But Southern senators, both Whig and Democrat agreed that if California were admitted as a free state, then other free states
1844-1877
13.1
might quickly follow, especially because there were virtually no slaves in either Oregon or New Mexico territories, the other land acquired by the United States in the 1840s that might logically soon be divided into states. The young senator from Mississippi, Jefferson Davis, concerned about that possibility, warned his colleagues that “we are about permanently to destroy the balance of power between the sections.” The Souths ill and aging champion John C. Calhoun wrote in his diary, “As things now stand, the South cannot with safety remain in the Union.” Much had happened to lead Davis and Calhoun to their conclusions. In the 1850s, more Southerners would come to believe that they could not remain in the Union, and hostility to the South and its peculiar institution of slavery would increase in the North. Although a new generation in Congress tried again to enact the kinds of compromises that had held the country together since the adoption of the Constitution in 1789, those efforts no longer worked. The tensions that led Southern states to feel compelled to secede from the United States in 1861 are the focus of this chapter.
FROM UNION TO DISUNION
Analyze the political jockeying in Congress and how reaction to the Fugitive Slave Act and the publication of Uncle Tom's Cabin changed the opinions of many Americans— South and the North—making a break between them hard to avoid.
The Congress that met in 1849 and 1850 and debated whether and how to admit California was one of the most contentious ever seated. The same three men, Daniel Webster of Massachusetts, John C. Calhoun of South Carolina, and Henry Clay of Kentucky, who had dominated the Senate as young men in 1820 now, as old men, played the central role in 1850. The dramatic debates of 1850 would be the last time the three would appear on the Senate floor. A new generation of senators would also play crucial roles in the coming years: Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois (who would contest the presidency with Abraham Lincoln in 1860), William H. Seward of New York and Salmon P. Chase of Ohio (who would both seek the Republican nomination for president in 1860 and then serve in Lincoln’s Cabinet), and Jefferson Davis of Mississippi (who would be elected president of the Confederacy in 1861).
Proslavery senators like Calhoun and Davis were worried about California, but they were even more worried about abolitionism in the North, which had been a growing force since the 1840s. Throughout the 1840s and 1850s there were many different kinds of abolitionists with differing levels of commitment to their cause, but Southerners tended to view all abolitionists as extremists. At the core of the movement were those known as the radical abolitionists for whom slavery was the greatest evil in the nation, an evil that needed to end immediately and completely. A larger group of Northerners were sympathetic with the radicals, but not willing to move as quickly or do as much to oppose slavery. Many of these moderates fell into the free-soil category, willing to let slavery stay where it already existed but adamantly opposing any extension of slavery to new territories where it did not yet exist by law. Finally, there were others for whom ending slavery was perhaps a good thing but not the highest priority. AU of these Northerners, however, were committed to free labor, the belief that slavery undermined the value and dignity of hard work and that many white people We also marginalized in places where slave labor was predominant. In the 1850s, this sentiment would lead voters in the new Republican Party to cheer for Free Soil, Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free Men.”
Many of the tensions that exploded in Congress in 1850 dated to the U.S. War with Mexico in the 1840s. In 1846, Democratic Congressman David Wilmot of Pennsylvania proposed an amendment to a military appropriations bill, prohibiting slavery in any territory acquired from Mexico. This so-called Wilmot Proviso sprang from growing anger among Northern Democrats at what they saw as the pro-Southern tilt of the Polk administration. With support from northern Whigs, the amendment

Wilmot Proviso
The amendment offered by Pennsylvania Democrat David Wilmot in 1846, which stipulated that "as an express and fundamental condition to the acquisition of any territory from the Republic of Mexico... neither slavery nor involuntary servitude shall ever exist in any part of said territory."
1850 Compromise of 1850 including Fugitive Slave Act passed
1852	Harriet Beecher Stowe's Unde Tom's Cabin
published in book form
1854	Kansas-Nebraska Act
Republican Party founded
1854-1859 Civil war in Kansas known as "Bleeding Kansas"
1857	Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision Lecompton Constitution adopted in Kansas, but free-soil majority boycott election
Panic of 1857
1858	Lincoln-Douglas debates Lecompton Constitution for Kansas rejected by Congress
1859	John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry federal arsenal
1860	Democratic Party splits into Northern and Southern halves
Abraham Lincoln elected president South Carolina secedes from the Union
1861	More Southern states secede—total of seven by February 1
Confederate States of America founded Lincoln inaugurated as president
