Chapter 25 Complacency and Cl

I 1952 Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for president i	United States tests H-Bomb
\	1953 Soviet Union tests H-Bomb
’ "	Eisenhower proposes "Atoms for Peace" at UN
U.S.
Supreme Court m. Board of Education ruling Defeat of French forces at Dien Bien Phu, Vietnam
U.S.-supported coup overthrows government in Guatemala
Senate censures Joseph McCarthy
1955	Eisenhower-Khrushchev summit meeting in Geneva
Rosa Parks arrested in Montgomery, Alabama
1956	Elvis Presley "Heartbreak Hotel" released Khrushchev "Secret Speech" denouncing Stalin Eisenhower signs Interstate Highway Act Suez Canal crisis
Hungarian uprising
Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for a second time
Conclusion of Montgomery bus boycott
1957	Riots at Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas
Soviet Union launches Sputnik satellite
1959	Castro comes to power in Cuba
U.S. U-2
reconnaissance plane shot down over Soviet Union Kennedy defeats Nixon for president
1961	John F. Kennedy inaugurated as president
Newton Minow speech, "Television and the Public Interest"
1963	March on Washington for civil rights
1964	Civil Rights Act passed
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party challenges regular Mississippi delegation at Democratic Convention
Malcolm X makes pilgrimage to Mecca
1965	Malcolm X assassinated
25.1
massive retaliation
A policy adopted by the Eisenhower administration to limit the costs of the Cold War. Rather than keep a large military presence, the administration used the threat to use the hydrogen bomb if the Soviet Union expanded its grasp to new territory.
EISENHOWER’S AMERICA, AMERICA’S WORLD___________________________________
Explain the continuation of the Cold War under a new Republican administration.
The successful test of a U.S. hydrogen bomb in November 1952, followed only months later by the successful test of a similar bomb by the Soviet Union (United Soviet Socialist Republic, or U.S.S.R.) in August 1953, meant that Eisenhower and every subsequent president would govern in a world that was quite different from any of their predecessors. While alliances like the U.S.-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact might position ground forces, the reality was that each of the superpowers had the capacity to destroy the other in a single stroke, and probably, for the first time in history, to destroy all life on earth. The Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union was a daunting reality for every person on the planet in the 1950s and for a long time thereafter.
Foreign Policy in a World of Hydrogen Bombs
Early in his first term, Eisenhower lamented, “We are in an armaments race. Where will it lead us? At worst, to atomic warfare. At best to robbing every people and nation on earth of the fruits of their own toil.” Eisenhower tried to diffuse the situation. In December 1953, he proposed an “Atoms for Peace” plan to the United Nations by which the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom, would turn over some of their nuclear material to an international agency for peaceful use. However, little came of the plan. The distrust between the two superpowers was too great. Influential political leaders in the United States would not support a reduction in defense spending because they worried about the Soviets and because military spending—a total of more than $350 billion during Eisenhower’s two terms—was key to defense industries and jobs in almost every congressional district in the country. So, the United States and the Soviets continued to build. The United States tested 203 nuclear weapons in the Pacific and at Nevada test sites, exposing some 200,000 civilians and soldiers to radiation and even more people to the radioactive fallout in more distant areas. The Soviets conducted at least as many tests if not more.
Along with his Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, Eisenhower tried to craft a foreign policy that kept the financial costs of the Cold War to a minimum, protected U.S. influences in key corners of the globe, and avoided war. This foreign policy comprised two key elements. The first was a policy of massive retaliation, announced by Dulles in January 1954. The United States was not prepared to take on the cost of keeping troops in every corner of the globe, especially after the war in Korea. Rather, the United States would try to protect the noncommunist world with programs like the Marshall Plan and the Berlin Airlift where possible, but also with the promise that if the Soviets tried to expand their sphere of influence, if they were to invade European or other countries allied with the West, then, said Dulles, the United States was prepared “to retaliate, instantly, by means and at a place of our choosing.” Some called the policy “brinkmanship” since the United States was ready to go to the brink of destruction if the Soviets moved outside their sphere of influence, and the Soviets were being put on notice that the United States was prepared to use its H-bombs and use them quickly. The Soviets might have had a larger army and navy, but the United States had plenty of bombs, Polaris submarines, as well as Atlas and Minuteman rockets that could hit the Soviet Union any time and any place. From a force of 1,500 nuclear weapons, the U.S. stockpile increased to 6,000. Relying on those weapons, the country could reduce the size of the military and overall military expenditures, keep taxes relatively low, and avoid inflation yet still ensure U.S. power around the globe.
716 PartVIll Fears,Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
The second element in Eisenhower’s foreign policy depended on secret activities organized by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). During World War II, the United States developed the capacity to spy on and disrupt the Axis countries through the Office of Strategic Services. At the end of the war, President Truman disbanded that office. Two years later, he received congressional authorization to re-create it, now as the CIA, to spy and conduct covert operations in foreign countries that the United States feared might become communist.
In the summer of 1953, the CIA organized a coup against the elected Prime Minister of Iran, Muhammad Mussadegh, who had nationalized oil interests belonging to British companies and who some feared might have communist sympathies. With the covert help of the CIA, he was overthrown and replaced with the pro-Western Muhammad Reza Shah Pahlevi, who ruled the country for more than 20 years before being displaced by an anti-U.S. Islamic revolution in the late 1970s.
Then in June 1954, the CIA helped overthrow the democratically elected government of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in Guatemala. Arbenz was promoting land reform by expropriating land owned by the U.S.-based United Fruit Company. Although the Arbenz administration had compensated United Fruit for the land, the company was angry, and the U.S. government feared a communist movement until CIA operatives, working with local insurgents, drove Arbenz from office. Neither action received much publicity in the United States, but the not-very-secret U.S. involvement built up significant anti-U.S. sentiment in the Middle East and Latin America. Later, in 1958, the CIA tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the government of Indonesia. In 1959, it played a role in installing a new pro-Western government in Laos. While Eisenhower knew of those actions, he may not have known about plans to assassinate the popular elected leader of the Congo, Patrice Lumumba (who was killed by dissidents before the CIA reached him), and the new leader of Cuba, Fidel Castro.
The Eisenhower administration also found itself caught up in other world crises that could not easily be handled by massive retaliation or CIA intervention. After World War II, France sought to reclaim control of its former colonies in Indochina, but many there wanted independence. In September 1945, with initial support from the United States, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed Vietnamese independence using words familiar to the Americans, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.” But the French were determined to reclaim Vietnam. They installed Bao Dai, the former emperor of Annam, a part of Vietnam, as the leader in Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh’s forces attacked the French. The United States, fearing a communist government under Ho and more worried about alienating France in Cold War Europe than events in Asia, sided with the French. By late 1953, the French were isolated in a fortified area, Dien Bien Phu, and facing defeat. Some, including Vice President Nixon, urged U.S. intervention, even the use of nuclear weapons. Eisenhower responded, “You boys must be crazy. We can t use those awful things against Asians for the second time in less than ten years. My God. There was no U.S. intervention at that time.
When the French were defeated in 1954, an international conference temporarily divided Vietnam into North Vietnam, to be led by Ho Chi Minh, and South Vietnam, to be led by Bao Dai and a pro-Western nationalist Ngo Dinh Diem. Elections to unify the country were scheduled for 1956. When Diem refused to participate in the 1956 elections, knowing that Ho, a national hero would win, the United States did not intervene The United States relied on the South East Asian Treaty Organization (SEATO), a much weaker version of NATO that it had helped to create in 1955, to keep Communists out of Southeast Asia, but the organization had little effect.
The next crisis also occurred in Asia. Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist government had been defeated on the Chinese mainland in 1949 and was ensconced on heavily fortified offshore islands, the largest of which was Taiwan, then known as Formosa, n 1954, the Communist government of China began shelling two tiny Nationalist-held
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Established by President Truman and expanded by President Eisenhower, the CIA was the nation's spy agency charged with keeping tabs on developments in other countries and with engaging in secret missions to advance American interests.
Chapter 25 Complacency and Chang<
25.1
PACIFIC
OCEAN

ARCTIC
Military alliances in the 1950s HUM U.S. allies HI U.S. allies/NATO members CZ3 USSR allies
USSR allies/
____Warsaw Pact members
L...I
Neutral nation MAP 25-1 A World Divided. As the Cold War continued in the 1950s, the world was divided into two major spheres of influence: the West led by the United States, which included the members of NATO and other allies, and the East (see page 719) led by the Soviet Union, which included the members of the Warsaw Pact and other allied nations. Both competed for influence in the remaining neutral nations, especially in Africa.
islands, Quemoy and Matsu, just off the Chinese coast. Eisenhower wanted to protect Chiang s government, but Quemoy and Matsu were small islands that were much closer to mainland China than to Taiwan. Having seen the war in Korea, Eisenhower was determined not to fight Communist China over Quemoy and Matsu. Eventually, both sides tired of the conflict and the islands remained under Nationalist rule. Nevertheless, the incident pointed to larger possible threats.
718 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
25.1
i
p52
253
Challenges to Maintaining Peace
In July 1955, Eisenhower met in Geneva with the new Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, and leaders of Britain and France. The summit meeting, whose purpose was to reduce international tensions, produced a treaty recognizing the independence of Austria, which had been jointly occupied by the four powers after World War II, much like Germany had been. Although, the summit did not accomplish all that Eisenhower wished, many were optimistic about a new spirit of coexistence.
In February 1956, Khrushchev surprised the world with a speech—originally a “secret speech” to Soviet leaders only, but word spread quickly—in which he said that Stalin had been a tyrant who had inflicted purges, show trials, forced labor, terror, and mass executions on his people. Khrushchev declared it was time to begin the de-Stalinization of the Soviet Union. The speech was a relief to those who saw the beginning of a new era in Russia, though devastating to die-hard Communists.
Chapter 25 Complacency and Ch<
25.1
2,5.2 j
I
133 !
i
Despite these advances, conflicts and differences continued to produce tensions, to which U.S. leaders were challenged to respond. In October, hostilities flared up in the Middle East. Gamal Abdel Nasser, the Arab nationalist ruler of Egypt, sought funding from both the United States and the Soviet Union to build the Aswan High Dam on the upper Nile River to irrigate new areas of Egypt, provide electricity, and promote industrialization. His flirtation with both sides angered both countries, and in 1956, Dulles cancelled the U.S. loan. Nasser responded by taking control of the Suez Canal, the essential waterway between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea that was owned by a British and French canal company and crucial to the flow of oil to Europe. Nasser said he wanted the revenue from the canal to build his dam, but his actions angered and frightened the British and French.
On October 29, with British and French backing, Israel attacked Egypt. Eisenhower was outraged. He sponsored a UN resolution demanding an Israeli withdrawal. It was an ironic moment with the United States and the Soviet Union united in opposition to Britain, France, and Israel. When the British and French ignored the UN and bombed Egypt, Nasser sank ships and blocked the canal. The United States condemned the British action and threatened to send troops to Egypt. The British never expected the United States to take a hard line. British Prime Minister Anthony Eden and Ike were wartime friends, but the president was furious. A cease fire was arranged, and the canal was reopened under Egyptian management. The Soviet Union and the United States looked good to Arab countries. Israel remained strong. Only Britain and France suffered. Eden resigned as Prime Minister, and neither Britain nor France was again a major influence in the Middle East.
In October 1956, in the midst of the Suez crisis, discontent with Soviet rule boiled over in Hungary. Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin had raised hopes for a more liberal policy in Eastern Europe. The Soviet government granted some concessions to the Hungarians, but when they pressed for more independence, Khrushchev sent 200,000 troops and 4,000 tanks to Budapest to end the uprising. Some 40,000 Hungarians were killed and another 150,000 fled the country seeking asylum in the west. Some called for American intervention; after all, Eisenhower had talked about the liberation of “captive peoples,” but the old general understood the military reality that Hungary was surrounded by other Communist nations. Most Americans seemed satisfied to label the uprising as more proof of Soviet tyranny and leave it at that.
While the Suez crisis and the Hungarian uprising were taking place, the United States was in the midst of a presidential election. The Democrats again nominated Adlai Stevenson. Although Eisenhower had a serious heart attack in 1955 and was hospitalized for 6 weeks, he had recovered fully. The Republicans again nominated their highly popular president and his not-very-popular running mate. The Democrats ran anti-Nixon television ads that they thought might be more effective than any attack on Eisenhower. Eisenhower was well liked, the country was at peace, and prosperity was evident. Eisenhower won 57 percent of the popular votes, but the outcome rested on Eisenhower’s personal popularity; the Democrats carried both houses of Congress.
Neither the country nor the president expected any major change of course in the next 4 years. However, new developments on the international front presented not only new crises but also an opportunity unimagined when Ike’s second term began.
A
Small Satellite and a Big Impact Sputnik	On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, a space satellite. Although
The world's first space satellite, launched by	Sputnik was small, about the size of a large beach ball, and weighed only 184 pounds,
the Soviet Union in 1957.	it was the first orbiting satellite ever launched into space. A month later, a much larger
Sputnik II was launched, which carried a dog, Laika, as well as scientific and medical instruments. While the Soviet Union celebrated, Americans panicked. The Soviets were clearly winning the space race, critics said. Democratic Senator Henry Jackson of Washington State talked of the “shame and danger” of the moment. G. Mennen
720 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
A new government agency created in 1958 in response to Sputnik and specifically charged with fostering American space efforts; eventually led to the first manned moon landing and the space shuttle.
National Defense Education Act (NDEA)
Federal aid to improve education, especially science and math education, approved by Congress in 1958.
Sputnik I, the first space satellite.
Chapter 25 Complacency and!
Williams, Michigans Democratic governor, wrote of Sputnik, “It’s a Commie sky. And Uncle Sams asleep.”
Because of U.S. spy flights over the Soviet Union, Eisenhower knew that although the Soviets might launch a satellite, the United States was far ahead in missile development. However, he could not say so without admitting to the spying, which he did not want to do. It was a difficult moment for an administration that worried as much about national security as they did about a race to space. Nevertheless, two important results came from Sputnik and the fears that the satellite induced—a new government space agency and improved education.
In 1958, the administration proposed the creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and before long, NASA scientists and engineers had launched the first U.S. satellite and soon closed the gap with the Soviet Union. Later NASA-led efforts resulted in human flight in space, a moon landing, a string of satellites that could be used for telecommunications (and spying), and a space shuttle that could bring cargo to replacement crews to orbiting space stations. For all of the fears of 1957 and 1958, the United States had far greater resources than the Soviets to devote to these efforts once the determination was made to do so.
The fears that resulted from the Soviet launch of Sputnik also had a major impact on American education. Many saw the Soviet advances in space as the result of superior Soviet education. Eisenhower proposed the National Defense Education Act (NDEA), which was passed by Congress in September 1958. After many failed efforts to get federal aid for the nation’s schools, funding was approved because of Sputnik. The NDEA provided funds to improve science education, provided scholarships, and created an education division within the National Science Foundation.
Although national worries had led to NDEA and the new curriculum materials that resulted, the 1950s had already been a time of considerable advances in education. In 1940, less than half (49%) of the nation’s 17-year-olds graduated from high school. By 1950, 57.4 percent of 17-year-olds completed high school; in 1960, 63.4 percent; and in 1970, 75.6 percent graduated. Before 1950, more girls than boys had finished high school but more males than females went to college. For a time after that, graduation and college attendance ratios began to even out, though imbalance would return later. Although white graduation rates remained far ahead of those for African-American and Latino students, many more students of color attended and graduated from high school in the 1950s than ever
before. Given the perceived national need, federal programs began to encourage more females to study in the sciences. At the college level, the GI Bill had generated a rapid increase in college attendance for military veterans, overwhelmingly white men, but as the decade went on, more students of all races and genders attended college. College faculty in the sciences benefitted from grants for military research, though some worried about the impact of these grants. Even before Sputnik was launched, a Time magazine article asked, “Is the military about to take over U.S. science lock, stock, and barrel, calling the tune for U.S. universities and signing up the best scientists for work fundamentally aimed at military results?”
In spite of “mutually assured destruction and the space race with the Soviets, Eisenhower, who had seen more of war than most Americans, desperately wanted to find a path to peace, not only to avoid the economic costs of war but also to create a lasting peace. Although the July 1955 summit conference at Geneva had been disappointing, the “Spirit of Geneva, and the commitment to coexistence was something on which Eisenhower wanted to build, especially in his last years in office. On October 31, 1958,
During the goodwill that emerged between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1958 and 1959, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev visited the United States and was a hit on tours such as this one of an Iowa farm.
the United States announced that it was suspending nuclear testing in the atmosphere. The Soviets also suspended their testing. By 1958, atmospheric nuclear testing was found to be a health risk to millions around the world as well as an unnecessary military provocation, and the cessation was important.
When a new crisis arose over Berlin in early 1959, Eisenhower and Khrushchev managed to avoid escalation. Each of the two leaders agreed to invite the other to visit his respective country in the next year. Khrushchev’s tour of the United States in September 1959 was a major success in spite of Khrushchev’s ill-timed boast that We will bury you.” The two leaders agreed to another summit in Paris in May 1960. Progress seemed to be in the air.
On May 1, 1960, the progress stopped. A U-2 reconnaissance plane—the type that had been providing the kind of information about Soviet military capability that Eisenhower had kept secret—was shot down by a Soviet rocket as it flew 1,300 miles inside Russia. Khrushchev announced that the Soviets not only had the wreckage of the U-2—and it was no weather plane—but also had captured the pilot, Francis Gary Powers, alive and had found both the poison needle with which he was supposed to kill himself rather than risk capture and a pistol with a silencer that he had been supplied. “Why the silencer?” Khrushchev asked, and then answered, “To blow men’s brains out! The men who supplied him with the silence gun pray in church and call us godless atheists!”
The U-2 incident dominated the Paris summit. Khrushchev insisted that Eisenhower condemn the U-2 flights and punish those responsible, which Eisenhower could not do, though he did agree to suspend the flights. Khrushchev withdrew the invitation for Eisenhower to visit the Soviet Union. There would be little talk of friendly coexistence in the next 2 years.
From Oldest to Youngest—The Transition to the Next President
While the administration dealt with the U-2 incident, the United States was in the midst of the 1960 presidential election. Eisenhower’s popularity was high, and if the Constitution had allowed it and he had wanted it, he could easily have won a third term. But the Constitution had been changed and Eisenhower at 70, the oldest serving president, had no interest in a third term.
The Republican Party nominated Vice President Richard Nixon as their presidential candidate. The Democratic race was contested between several candidates, including Senators Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas, Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota, Stuart Symington of Missouri, and John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts. Many remembered the defeat of Al Smith in 1928—the last time a major party had nominated a Catholic—and wondered if Kennedy, a Catholic, could be successful. Liberals also worried about Kennedy. Eleanor Roosevelt remembered how slow he had been to attack McCarthy and how little he had done for civil rights. She preferred Adlai Stevenson. But Kennedy had several important strengths. He had extraordinary personal charisma, charming most everyone he met. He also had virtually unlimited campaign funds because of the wealth of his father, Joseph P. Kennedy, and could far outspend his opponents. Under the leadership of his brother Robert Kennedy, he had a superb campaign team. He won the Democratic nomination on the first ballot, asked Lyndon Johnson to be his running mate, and entered the general election as a strong candidate.
Nixon, having been vice president for two terms, was the better known. For the first time in American politics, the two candidates held a series of television debates.
722 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Those who listened to the debates on radio thought Nixon had won due to the clarity of his argument. For the much larger television audience, however, Nixon seemed tired and haggard while Kennedy who arrived from California well rested and with a tan seemed at the height of new youthful vigor. In response to Kennedy’s charisma, Newsweek reported that there were “jumpers” who leapt to see him, “runners” who chased his car, and others who simply screamed themselves hoarse. People applauded politely for Nixon.
Although Eisenhower despised the Kennedys, whom he saw as rich, ambitious, and unprincipled, his lack of enthusiasm for his vice president was hard to hide. When a reporter asked Ike to name a major Nixon contribution to the administration, he replied, “If you give me a week, I might think of one.” Although he immediately recanted, the damage was done.
During the competitive campaign, Kennedy accused Eisenhower of allowing a “missile gap” to develop between the United States and the Soviet Union and promised that, if elected, the United States would expand its defenses and its missions in space. He also addressed his Catholicism in a well-received speech to Protestant clergy in Houston,
Texas. Late in the campaign, when Martin Luther King, Jr., was arrested in Georgia, Nixon tried to intervene quietly, but Kennedy made a very public call to King’s wife, Coretta, and Bobby Kennedy made a successful request for King’s release. Many blacks, key voters in some states, decided to vote Democratic that fall. On election day, with the high-
est turnout since World War II, Kennedy won by one of the smallest margins in history—49.7 percent to Nixon’s 49.6 percent though he won in the Electoral College 303 to 219.
On inauguration day, January 20, 1961, the youngest person ever elected president replaced the oldest serving president. The general who had commanded all allied troops in Europe in World War II was replaced by a man who had commanded a small P.T. (Patrol Torpedo) boat in the Pacific and who became a hero when his PT-109 was sunk. The new president made much of the leadership change, telling the nation, “Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans.”
In the first ever televised presidential debate, John Kennedy managed to project charm and confidence to the viewers.
0
Quick Review How did Eisenhower continue fighting the Cold War? How were his Cold War and domestic policies similar to or different from Truman's?
A CULTURE ON THE MOVE
252
Explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
During and after the 1950s, many looked on that era as one of complacency at home and trouble abroad. By I960, however, the United States was a very different place at home from what it had been in 1950. During the 1950s, the nation became much more prosperous. In 1960, the average family income of $5,620 was 30 percent higher than it had been in 1950, and 62 percent of homes were owner occupied—up from 55 percent in 1950 and 44 percent in 1940. After the end of the Korean War in 1953, the decade was one of relative peace for the United States despite conflicts elsewhere. But the decade of the 1950s was also, as the writer Morris Dickstein noted, “a fertile period, a seedbed of ideas that would burgeon and live in the more activist, less reflective climate that followed.”
Chapter 25 Complacency and Chan
The Growing Impact of Television
In 1948, Wayne Coy, a member of the Federal Communications Commission that regulated television and radio, said, “Make no mistake about it, television is here to stay. It is a new force unloosed in the land. I believe it is an irresistible force. From 104 commercial stations broadcasting to 5 million homes in 1950, television expanded to almost 600 stations received in 45,750,000 homes in 1960—almost 80 percent of all of U.S. homes.
Some of the early television programs were impressive. Playhouse 90, the Goodyear Television Playhouse, and the Kraft Television Theater brought serious drama to the television screen. Talented young actors, including Grace Kelly, Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, and Eva Marie Saint, were seen by wider audiences than ever before. The ABC Concert carried weekly concerts by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra around the country.
Television news, though generally limited to a 15-minute program, included the Camel News Caravan with John Cameron Swayze and the CBS Television News with Douglas Edwards and brought current events into living rooms. Beginning with Truman’s 1949 inauguration and Eisenhower’s 1952 campaign commercials, television changed politics; people felt a new intimacy with candidates and leaders. Edward R. Murrow’s See It Now programs brought investigative journalism to television, including coverage of Senator McCarthy’s hearings.
Lighter entertainment was very successful, too. Radio had been available to many since the 1930s, and some programs, like Jack Benny’s comedy routines, shifted from radio to television with little change. The long-running I Love Lucy show with Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz was the most popular show on television. Other comedies, especially The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, Father Knows Best, and Leave It to Beaver, used humor to reaffirm the white, middle class, suburban lifestyle in which the wise, sometimes befuddled father supported the family while the passive (if sometimes conniving) mother stayed home to happily manage the house.
A middle-class, white family sitting at home and watching The Lone Ranger on television epitomized the 1950s for some.
724 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
American Voices
Newton N. Minow, Television and the Public Interest, 1961
25.2
s he began his presidency, John F. Kennedy appointed attorney and long-time Democratic Party activist Newton N. Minow to chair the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Although Minow had little background in the media, he and Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy had strong opinions about television. In May 1961, only a few months into his tenure at the FCC, Minow gave this controversial speech to the National Association of Broadcasters, declaring that television was "a vast wasteland." While many in the television industry strongly disagreed, many critics thought Minow was on target.
Your industry possesses the most powerful voice in America. It has an inescapable duty to make that voice ring with intelligence and with leadership. In a few years, this exciting industry has grown from a novelty to an instrument of overwhelming impact on the American people. It should be making ready for the kind of leadership that newspapers and magazines assumed years ago, to make our people aware of their world....
When television is good, nothing—not the theater, not the magazines or newspapers—nothing is better.
But when television is bad, nothing is worse. I invite each of you to sit down in front of your television set when your station goes on the air and stay there, for a day, without a book, without
a magazine, without a newspaper, without a profit and loss sheet or a rating book to distract you. Keep your eyes glued to that set until the station signs off. I can assure you that what you will observe is a vast wasteland.
You will see a procession of game shows, formula comedies about totally unbelievable families, blood and thunder, mayhem, violence, sadism, murder, western bad men, western good men, private eyes, gangsters, more violence, and cartoons. And endlessly, commercials—many screaming, cajoling, and offending. And most of all, boredom.
Source: Delivered May 9,1961, National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, DC; downloaded from www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/newtonminow.htm, May 11,2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
In Minow's view, what was the most important negative impact of poor television programming?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light does Minow's speech shed on the nature of the growing discontent with mainstream 1950s culture?
On The Ed Sullivan Show, the poker-faced Ed Sullivan introduced Elvis Presley (who Sullivan insisted be shown only from the waist up) and, later, The Beatles to American audiences. Daytime soap operas (their original sponsors were soap companies) moved from radio to television, and Guiding Light, Love of Life, and Search for Tomorrow provided a dash of scandal to daytime viewers. Families gathered to eat TV dinners (first marketed in 1954) on TV trays, rather than around a dining room table, to watch Gunsmoke, featuring a stronger and more silent Marshal Dillon than had been possible on radio, plus Maverick, and Have Gun—Will Travel, as well as detective stories, including Dragnet, 77 Sunset Strip, and Perry Mason. Children s cartoons took over Saturday mornings. Reruns of old movies were shown in the late evening.
While some of the first programs had a single sponsor—such as the Goodyear Television Playhouse, the Kraft Television Theater, and the Camel News Caravan, broadcasters quickly discovered that they could make higher profits with multiple advertisers, and 30-second commercials urged Americans (always seen as white and middle class) to “see the USA in your Chevrolet,” or “move up to Chrysler,” and handle their indigestion with “Speedy” Alka Seltzer.
Television was rocked by not only a series of scandals in the late 1950s but also significant criticism. The most popular quiz show, The $64,000 Question, turned out to be rigged. Charles Van Doren, a major winner on the show, had been given answers in advance. As commercial stations focused on advertising revenue, they became increasingly cautious. One advertiser reminded the station owners, “A program that displeases any substantial segment of the population is a misuse of the advertising dollar.” Since showing Americans in all of their diversity could displease some, television became bland. Even President Eisenhower said, “If a citizen has to be bored to death,
Chapter 25 Complacency and Change
I
Interstate Highway System
A national system of super highways that Congress approved at the urging of President Eisenhower in 1956 to improve car and truck travel across the United States.
it is cheaper and more comfortable to sit at home and look at television than it is to go outside and pay a dollar for a ticket.” It was hardly a ringing endorsement of the new medium. The Kennedy administration would not be any more positive in its appraisal.
The Impact of the Automobile
Automobiles had been invented before 1900, mass-produced in the 1910s, and had a significant impact by the 1920s (see Chapter 21). Nevertheless, the automobile, like the TV, came to dominate American culture in the 1950s as never before.
Once wartime shortages ended, the sales of private automobiles grew rapidly. By 1960, 80 percent of American families owned an automobile (the same percentage as owned televisions). The total number of cars registered at the end of the decade was 74 million, almost double the 39 million registered in 1950. In addition, the cars were becoming larger, faster, more powerful, and much flashier. In an era of cheap gasoline, the symbolism of power, sexiness, and speed was far more important than fuel efficiency.
Automobiles needed support services and infrastructure, most of all, highways. By the early 1950s, the American Road Builders Association was able to successfully lobby for the creation of the Highway Trust Fund in which all revenue generated from automobiles, especially the tax on gasoline, could be used only to build highways with the result that, in the United States, funding for road building was ample, though funds for mass transit were more scarce. European countries used similar funds not only for roads but also for mass-transit, schools, and hospitals.
President Eisenhower, who remembered a miserable cross-country journey he had made as a young army officer on the nations ill-maintained highways of the 1920s, adopted a plan that had been put together during the Truman administration and proposed the Interstate Highway Act, which became law in 1956. The act created the Interstate Highway System, a numbered network of 41,000 miles of roads from Interstate 5 in California, Oregon, and Washington to Interstate 95 that ran from Florida to Maine, connected to east-west interstates 70, 80, and 90 as well as feeder highways for which the federal government paid 90 percent of the cost (see Map 25-2). These highways made travel by car, truck, or bus much easier and cheaper than ever before. At the same time, urban, suburban, and rural sprawl was exacerbated. Suburban houses sprang up and tight-knit urban communities went into decline. Shopping malls replaced Main Street. Mass transit declined. In Los Angeles, what had once been the largest electric interurban railway in the world with 1,100 miles of track, was replaced with a system of highways using buses produced by General Motors with tires from Firestone Rubber.
New industries sprang up to service the automobile and the highway. Fast-food restaurants allowed busy drivers to pick up a meal and keep moving. Medical, legal, and insurance services for the victims of traffic accidents grew. Motels became a new place to stay, replacing grand downtown hotels that had catered to those who traveled by train or ship. Kemmons Wilson and Wallace E. Johnson opened the first “Holiday Inn” in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1952, and by 1960, there were 60,000 motels, many belonging to chains like Holiday Inn or Howard Johnson, catering to people who valued cleanliness, comfort, and the convenience of being able to drive directly to the door of a room.
Between 1920 and 1950, gasoline service stations offering fuel and automobile services, some in a grand style, became the most widely built new commercial structure in the United States. With their signs advertising Mobil, Shell, and Esso (later Exxon), they made it possible to keep cars fueled and on the move. The gasoline these stations pumped also had an impact on U.S. foreign policy as American political leaders understood the nation s love affair with the automobile and the need to maintain a steady supply of cheap gasoline, much of it from the Middle East and Latin American, if they were to stay in office.
726 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
.Seattle
MAP 25-2 The Interstate Highway System. The current Interstate Highway System is surprisingly close to the original plan approved by the federal government in 1956 for a system of super highways linking all parts of the 48 states.
Critics worried about the impact of the automobile on American culture. In The City in History, Lewis Mumford complained that the automobile “annihilates the city whenever it collides with it.” For Mumford, it was the city, not suburban sprawl, that created community. Raymond Tucker, mayor of St. Louis also noted, “The plain fact of the matter is that we just cannot build enough lanes of highways to move all of our people by private automobile and create enough parking space to store the cars without completely paving over our cities.” Nevertheless, in the 1950s, more Americans agreed with New York’s master highway builder Robert Moses, who designed a series of bridges in and around New York as well as the Brooklyn Queens Expressway, the Cross Bronx Expressway, and the Long Island Expressway, and who kept advocating for more roads even as some protested. The Boom of Religion
In the 1950s, Americans drove to church and watched religious programs on television in numbers never seen before. The religious boom of the 1950s was both a cultural and a spiritual phenomenon.
For most of the nation’s history, a little over one-third of the people were involved in religious activities. However, in the 1950s, that number grew to over two-thirds, and on some Sunday mornings, more than half of all of the people in the country were in church. After World War II, Americans became active in religious organizations in numbers
Chapter 25 Complacency
never seen before, and their participation kept rising for the next 15 years. Visitors from other countries were stunned by the American embrace of religion. In no other country was there a similar upsurge, certainly not in war-weary Europe. Americans identified with religious communities, built new churches at an astounding rate, especially in the new suburbs, and enjoyed songs like “I Believe,” “It’s No Secret What God Can Do, and “Vaya con Dios,” as popular secular music. Historians continue to ask what accounted for this upsurge in religious activity. The roots of something as elusive as religious faith and as hard to discover as social conformity may be impossible to find, but the signs of the times that pointed to a more religious culture were numerous.
No one represented the religious movements of the 1950s more dramatically than Billy Graham. Graham was born on a farm near Charlotte, North Carolina, in 1918. In 1949, he led a revival in Los Angeles that brought him national attention and remained the nation’s best known religious leader for the next 50 years. The Billy Graham Evangelistic Association had an annual budget of $2 million and a staff of 200 in the 1950s. It produced books, television programs, radio, and its own films. Most of all, the association organized massive religious revivals that were held in football stadiums and civic auditoriums around the country. To the frustration of some conservative supporters, Graham would not plan a religious crusade, as he called a revival, without the support of the local council of churches, which included liberal as well as conservative clergy. Graham also refused to hold racially segregated revivals, even in the Deep South.
Graham was immensely successful in bringing out thousands of people night after night. At the end of each event, individuals were invited to come forward and make a personal confession of faith to counselors who were waiting for them, as the audience sang, “Just as I Am Without One Plea.” Although he was a Baptist, Graham did not worry about religious denominations and urged the converted to attend any church that appealed to them. Graham’s success was such that he also became a religious advisor to several U.S. presidents.
While Graham was by far the best known and most successful revivalist of the 1950s, many others, black and white and increasingly Latino evangelists, conducted their own religious revivals in churches, tents, and fields across the United States. Oral Roberts, a Pentecostal Holiness revivalist and faith healer, built up his own media empire that rivaled Graham’s. Less emotional versions of religion, including the sermons of the Presbyterian minister Peter Marshall, published in 1949 as Mr. Jones Meet the Master also attracted a wide audience.
A
Protestant minister within the Reformed Church in America, Norman Vincent Peale, took the quest for peace of mind to a wide audience through his books, Guide to Confident Living published in 1948 and The Power of Positive Thinking published in 1952, which broke all previous records for the sales of a religious book. Peale’s message was “believe in yourself’ and develop “a humble but reasonable confidence.” Religious groups known as the “mainstream” of American Protestantism—Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Episcopalians—flourished in the 1950s with large memberships and with influence rivaling any point in their history. Reinhold Niebuhr s book, Moral Man and Immoral Society, challenged religious people to find ways to make ethical decisions in a complex world. Both Reinhold Niebuhr and the German-born theologian Paul Tillich appeared on the cover of Time magazine. In the 1950s, American Catholics were still a minority but were more numerous than any single Protestant denomination. As white Catholics moved to new suburban communities, Catholic bishops created new parishes where none had been. Some Catholic prelates such as New York s Francis Cardinal Spellman continued to keep their distance from Protestants, but others such as Boston s Richard Cardinal Cushing found ways to reach out to non-Catholics while building Catholic churches and parochial schools at a furious rate. The walls of distrust were still high in the 1950s: parish priests warned young people not to date a Protestant, and many Protestants still saw Catholicism as inherently foreign and undemocratic. Nevertheless, many of those who sat in the pews of Catholic and Protestant churches were ready to ignore the old divides.
728 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Monsignor Fulton J. Sheen became a popular preacher not only at Catholic religious gatherings (never called revivals) but also on television. He brought Catholic teachings into the mainstream of American culture, and his book Peace of Soul, published in 1949, anticipated some of the positive-thinking themes in Peale’s work. Sheen restated traditional Catholic beliefs in ways that appealed to a wide audience, Catholic and non-Catholic.
While 66 percent of Americans identified themselves as Protestant and 26 percent as Catholic, only 3 percent were Jews, but Jews also participated in the religious upsurge of the 1950s. Before World War II, secularism and assimilation seemed to go hand in hand among many Jewish immigrants. Although a growing awareness of the Holocaust brought despair and cynicism to some, it brought a renewed interest in their faith to others. A new generation of leaders like Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel spoke of the need to link modern thinking with traditional Jewish practices and inner piety. Many American Jews wanted to rediscover their faith. The children of parents who had argued over politics now argued over theology. Attendance at synagogues reached peaks never seen before. The Orthodox, Reform, and Conservative branches of Judaism all grew.
African-American communities also had their own revivals of religion, usually quite separately from white communities. The National Baptist Convention, the African Methodist Episcopal, and the African Methodist Episcopal Zion churches, the nation’s three largest African-American religious bodies, all grew during the 1950s. Black Pentecostalism flourished in northern cities as it long had in the rural South. The Church of God in Christ, founded in the 1890s, saw its largest growth in the 1950s and by 1965 had 420,000 members in 4,150 churches. The United House of Prayer for All People, led by “Sweet Daddy” Grace, promised grace in return for strict obedience to the church’s teaching. In addition, Elijah Muhammad built up the Nation of Islam from the small Detroit Temple Number One, founded in 1931, to perhaps a community of 100,000 members.
A much smaller number of Americans also looked beyond the bounds of the traditional western faiths. The inspiration of Mohandas Gandhi in India led some to look at Hinduism. From the teachings of the Vedanta Society or the California-based Self-Realization Fellowship, some people turned to yoga or transcendental meditation. Others were attracted to the Baha’i movement, an offshoot of Shiite Islam in Iran that sought to synthesize the teachings of all world religions. Buddhism remained small in the United States in the 1950s, mostly limited to communities of Asian immigrants, though in the 1960s that status would change quickly.
As Americans became more actively engaged in their religious communities, political leaders sought to catch up. In the midst of the Cold War, they saw American religious sentiment as an important counter to atheistic communism. In 1954, Congress voted to add the phrase “one nation under God” to the Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag. A year later, Congress added the words “In God We Trust” to American paper currency. While some believers and nonbelievers found this public religiosity offensive, most Americans embraced the sort of civic religion embedded in the new pledge and coins with enthusiasm. President Eisenhower said, Our government makes no sense unless it is founded on a deeply felt religious faith and I don t care what it is.
Dissent
Although the 1950s have been described as a time of conformity, not everyone conformed. Born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1897, Dorothy Day joined the Socialist Party and later the IWW as a young woman, opposed U.S. entry into World War I, and was arrested for picketing the White House as she demanded the vote for women. In the 1920s, she lived a bohemian life with poets and communists in New Yorks Greenwich Village. Then in 1927, she experienced a dramatic conversion to Catholicism, left the man with whom she was living, and was baptized along with her new baby. In the 1930s, along with the
Chapter 25 Complacency
729
Catholic mystic Peter Maurin, founded the Civil Catholic Worker Movement and its related newspaper, The Catholic Worker, which Day edited until her death in 1980. Day embraced voluntary poverty, set up the St. Josephs House of Hospitality in New York to provide food and clothing to those in need, and protested the buildup of nuclear arms and the wars in Korea and later Vietnam. The Catholic Worker Movement sometimes made church officials uncomfortable because it represented a voice of dissent within the Catholic Church and the larger American culture in the 1950s.
A
Protestant from the rural South, Myles Horton had much in common with Dorothy Day. Horton studied with Reinhold Niebuhr and later Jane Addams, joined the Socialist Party, picketed for the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, and participated in endless seminars and late night discussions. In 1931, he moved back to Tennessee where he opened the Highlander Folk School to work with people from the bottom, who could change society from the bottom.” In the 1930s and 1940s, Highlander trained grass-roots leadership for the labor movement, and in the 1950s and 1960s, for the Civil Rights Movement. These groundbreaking dissidents, however, seemed tame to many compared with the influence of rock n’ roll, and no rock ‘n’ roll figure got more attention, or worried more people in the 1950s, than Elvis Presley. Presley grew up poor in Mississippi and Tennessee, learning to sing and play a guitar in his Assembly of God congregation. Music producer Sam Phillips knew that although many young white Americans loved black music, even the best of black entertainers could not break through the culture’s rigid color barrier. “If I could find a white man with a Negro sound,” Phillips said, “I could make a billion dollars.” With Elvis, he came close.
With Phillips handling the marketing, Elvis Presley became a star. The music in “Hound Dog” and “Heartbreak Hotel” represented a new amalgam of rhythm and blues, jazz, and pop as well as the earlier rock £n’ roll of groups like Bill Haley and the Comets whose “Rock Around the Clock” sold 16 million records.
Elvis sold more than his music. His alienated look and his gyrating sexuality connected with young audiences who loved what he represented. Critics were appalled.
Elvis Presley's music and performance style captivated fans and frightened more cautious observers but transformed rock and roll music in American culture.
730 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
One said that his performances were “strip-teases with clothes on.. .not only suggestive but downright obscene. Exactly that sultry suggestiveness is just what made him so popular to a generation tired of conformity. When Elvis appeared on the Ed Sullivan Show, 54 million people watched, the largest television audience in history.
Elvis was the top musical star leading many other musicians such as black rock ‘n’ roll artists Chuck Berry, Chubby Checker, and Fats Domino as well as traditional pop music and jazz greats, but it was the new rock ‘n’ roll that defined the era. Leonard Bernstein, one of the great composers of the century, once described Elvis Presley as “the greatest cultural force in the 20th century.”
Even in science, more overt attention to human sexuality challenged traditional norms in the 1950s. Alfred Kinsey, the Indiana University researcher whose book, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, had produced an outcry in 1948, published Sexual Behavior in the Human Female in 1953, which though long and full of dry scientific data, sold 250,000 copies. While Kinsey insisted that he was simply reporting, not making value judgments, findings like the fact that 37 percent of all men and 13 percent of women had at least one homosexual experience or the fact that 50 percent of married men and 26 percent of married women had committed adultery, shocked Americans and simultaneously created an “everybody’s doing it” mentality.
Hugh Hefner played into that mentality when he first published Playboy magazine in December 1953, which represented pure hedonistic pleasure. ..for men. Playboy linked sexuality with upward mobility and defined the good life as enjoying sex, liquor, smoking, and consumer products, without restraint. When Hefner published the first issue, with Marilyn Monroe as the centerfold, he was deeply in debt but sold enough copies that he could issue another, and by 1960, Playboy sold over a million copies a month.
Novelists joined in the celebration of sexuality. Grace Metalious, who had never written a book before, published Peyton Place in 1956, a novel that detailed scandalous affairs in a suburban context. Vladimir Nabokov, a respected writer, published Lolita, about the life of a young sex-addicted woman and a sex-obsessed middle-aged man. In 1958, Grove Press published an unexpurgated edition of D. H. Lawrence’s Lady Chatterley’s Lover, unavailable previously in the United States. Whatever else Americans were doing in the privacy of their homes, larger numbers of them were clearly reading much more sexually explicit material in the 1950s than in any previous generation.
Within this context of breaking from traditional cultural norms, other artists explored their own alienation in a conformist society. In J.D. Salinger’s novel, The Catcher in the Rye, the book’s teenage hero, Holden Caulfield saw adults as “phonies” who kept up pretenses that did not fit reality. Novelists like Ralph Ellison, Flannery O’Connor, Saul Bellow, Bernard Malamud, James Baldwin, John Updike, Mary McCarthy, and Philip Roth explored America’s racism and the quiet desperation of many. In the late 1950s, poets and political radicals like Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac took dissent to new levels. The “beat generation” challenged not only cultural pretentions of Eisenhower’s America, but the artistic pretentions of its major critics. In “Howl,” Ginsberg’s 1956 poem, he wrote, “I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness.” It was Ginsberg’s good luck that police in San Francisco seized Howl and Other Poems as obscene and forced a trial that brought Ginsberg to national attention. Kerouac’s On the Road, published in 1957, glorified escape from expectations and conventions. Some in the 1950s found themselves embracing Kerouac s belief that, “Ihe only people for me are the mad ones, the ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same time, the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn like fabulous yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars.
A
Quick Review How did the media play a strong role in both the conformity and rebellion of the 1950s? What other forces supported conformity or rebellion? Chapter 25 Compla
lange 731
RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS
25.3
Analyze the growth and impact of the Civil Rights Movement between 1954 and 1965.
1
75 j!
25.3
Segregation, economic marginalization, and political disenfranchisement were reality for most African-Americans in the 1950s as they had been since the collapse of Reconstruction in the 1870s and 1880s (see Chapter 15 and Chapter 19). However, the African-American community never accepted segregation or second-class citizenship, and in the 1950s, it seemed as if African-American resistance to “separate but equal” burst forth in many different places at about the same time (see Map 25-3). Legal challenges to school segregation that had been building for decades achieved a major victory in 1954. Soon thereafter, long-simmering opposition to segregation in public transportation led to a year-long bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama. Meanwhile, young African-Americans and some white supporters sat in at segregated lunch counters, organized voter registration drives, and found themselves considering significant alternatives to American culture.
Brown v. Board of Education
A
Supreme Court decision in 1954 declaring that "separate but equal" schools for children of different races violated the Constitution. The Long Road to Brown v. Board of Education
On May 17, 1954, the United States Supreme Court announced its unanimous decision in the legal challenge to the racial segregation of public schools, a case known as Brown v. Board of Education. Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote:
We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of “separate but equal” has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.
It had been a long road to the day of that finding.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), though founded in 1909, was often only whispered in black communities in the South throughout the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s. In the early 1950s, Anne Moody, then a high school student in Centerville, Mississippi, asked her homeroom teacher what NAACP meant. The teacher said, “You see the NAACP is trying to do a lot for the Negroes and get the right to vote for Negroes in the South.” She also warned Moody, “I shouldn’t be telling you all of this... .It could cost me my job.” The teacher was gone the following year.
In the 1930s, the NAACP began to challenge state “separate but equal” laws, bypassing state legislatures and governors with federal court cases arguing that the separate facilities were, in fact, far from equal. Two brilliant lawyers took charge of the NAACP legal effort—Charles Hamilton Houston, then dean of the Howard University Law School, and his former student, Thurgood Marshall. When Houston retired in 1938, Marshall, then just 30 years old, became the NAACP chief counsel, a position he held for 23 years. In 1961, Marshall was appointed as a federal judge serving on the U.S. Court of Appeals, and from 1967 to 1991, he served as the first appointed African-American justice of the U. S. Supreme Court.
The Houston-Marshall strategy at the NAACP was to chip away at segregation. In a 1938 case, Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada, Registrar of the University, et al., the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Lloyd Gaines could not be rejected by the University of Missouri Law School on the basis of his race unless the university could offer him an equally good legal education within the state of Missouri. To offer legal education to whites but not to blacks, or to force blacks to leave the state for their education, Chief Justice Hughes said, “is a denial of the equality of legal right.” In Alston v. School Board of the City of Norfolk in 1940, the NAACP won a ruling that said separate salary schedules for black and white teachers violated the Fourteenth Amendment. In 1950, the court issued two rulings. In Sweatt v. Painter, it said that separate law schools for blacks and whites were not equal, and in McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, it ruled that segregating graduate students violated their equal protection rights. With each case, segregation was becoming more expensive for states to maintain and the arena
732 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
In Brown v. ihe Topeka Board of” Education, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1954 that public school segregation was unconstitutional
Topeka
KANSAS
President Eisenhower ordered troops to enforce the intergration of Central High School in 1957
OKLAHOMA
Routes of 1961 Freedom Rides
CORE (Congress on Racial Equality) route from Washington, D.C., to Birmingham, Alabama SNCC (Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee) route from Birmingham, Alabama, to Jackson, Mississippi
MAP 25-3 Civil Rights Events, 1953-1963. Most of the major events of the Civil Rights Movement took place in the states of the South. Some are indicated in this map.

NEBRASKA
In 1962, James Meredith integrated j the University of Mississippi
TEXAS
| In 1955, the murder of I Emmett Till (age 14) by I whites drew national attention
in which it could be exercised smaller. The time was coming for a direct challenge to Plessy v. Ferguson, the 1896 decision by which the Supreme Court had originally approved “separate but equal” arrangements.
While the NAACP lawyers were winning cases, students at the all-black R. R. Morton High School in Farmville, Virginia, called a strike to protest conditions at their school in 1951. Although the white school in Farmville had comfortable facilities, some classes at R.R. Morton were held in tar-paper shacks, students had to wear coats to keep warm, and the teachers had to gather wood for the wood stoves. The authorities had long promised new facilities, but construction was continually postponed.
Only after going on strike did the students appeal to the NAACP. The national organization sent word that they would consider taking the case, but only if the challenge was for completely integrated schools. The students agreed and called on the adults in their community to follow them. Thus was launched one of the five cases that would be consolidated as Brown v. Board of Education.
The five states whose policies were challenged in the NAACP suit hired the 1924 Democratic presidential nominee John W. Davis as their attorney to defend the separate but equal policies. However, the Supreme Court agreed with the NAACP’s argument that separate education always violated the 14th amendment’s guarantee of “the equal protection of the laws.” The unanimous 1954 decision said, “We come then to the question presented: Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the physical facilities and other Tangible’ factors may be equal, deprive the children of the minority group of the equal educational opportunities? We believe that it does.
There were those who thought that with the Brown decision the battle was over. Many years later, Kenneth Clark, whose testimony was central to the case, recalled ruefully, “How naive I was!...I thought that within ten years or so, America would be free of it.... I expected southern states to resist, but I thought that their resistance would decrease and that we were on the road to some sort of functional democracy. It would take much more.
Chapter 25 Complacency and Ch.
Some governors began massive resistance to school integration. The most dramatic took place in Little Rock, Arkansas, in the fall of 1957. Rather than allow the racial integration of previously all-white Central High School, the state s segregationist governor Orval Faubus ordered the Arkansas National Guard to stop nine African-American students from enrolling in the school. In a speech the night before school was scheduled to begin, Faubus said he was making the move because of a fear of violence. Blood will run in the streets,” he said, if black students tried to enter Central High.
Nine brave young students, known as the Little Rock Nine, were scheduled to test the integration of Central High School. Elizabeth Eckford remembered the terror when she found herself face to face with a white mob:
Somebody started yelling, “Lynch her! Lynch her!”
I tried to see a friendly face somewhere in the mob—someone who maybe
would help. I looked into the face of an old woman and it seemed a kind face, but when I looked at her again, she spat on me.
It was a harrowing experience that Eckford never forgot.
The students, the mob, and the National Guard were all recorded on national television. While President Eisenhower was no advocate of school integration, he was not about to allow an order of the U.S. Supreme Court to be flouted. He told his Attorney General Herbert Brownell, “Well, if we have to do this, and I don’t see any alternative, then let’s apply the best military principles to it and see that the force we send there is strong enough that it will not be challenged, and will not result in any clash.” Eisenhower sent riot-trained units of the 101st Airborne. Before nightfall, a thousand U.S. soldiers were in Little Rock, securing the high school and ensuring the safety of the students.
Montgomery, Alabama
In 1955, a year and a half after the Brown decision, Rosa Parks finished her work day in Montgomery, Alabama, and began her bus ride home. She took a seat in the prescribed “Negro section” in the back of the bus. A few blocks later, when more whites boarded,
°"h T b aC\StU?entS wh0 sou9ht to enroll at Little Rock Central High School in September 1957, endures the taunts of an angry white crowd as she tries to make her way to the school.
734 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
!5/I
The arrest of Rosa Parks in 1955 for refusing to abide by the rules of the segregated buses of Montgomery, Alabama, represented an important moment in civil rights history, one of many developments that undermined the image of the 1950s as an era of total complacency with the status quo.
the driver, J. P. Blake, moved the line between the sections so that all of the whites could have seats. When none of the blacks moved,
Blake warned them, “You better make it light on yourselves and let me have those seats .” When others moved, Rosa Parks stayed where she was. “Are you going to stand up?” Blake asked. Parks said, quite simply, “No.”
Blake summoned the Montgomery police who arrested Parks.
When she was allowed to call home, Parks told her mother of her arrest and her mother immediately got in touch with E. D. Nixon, the acknowledged leader of Montgomery’s civil rights community who was not a newcomer to making tough decisions. Nixon, then 56, was president of Montgomery’s chapter of the NAACP. He worked as a porter on the railroad and was vice-president of the Alabama branch of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the most powerful black-led union in the United States. He had been one of the planners for the 1941 March on Washington. Nixon asked Clifford and Virginia Durr, Montgomery whites who were civil rights activists, to join him and the three went to the Montgomery jail to sign the bond for Rosa Parks’ release. Within a few hours, Parks was free and at home.
Early in that evening, the matter could have ended. The court would probably have let Parks off with a small fine, and the segregated world of Montgomery could have returned to normal. But as Nixon and the Durrs talked with Rosa Parks, her husband, and her mother, the question arose: Was this incident the test case they had all been waiting for? In Brown v. Board of Education the year before, the Supreme Court had ruled that segregated schools were illegal. But what about transportation? If she were willing, if she could overcome her husband Raymond’s fear that, “The white folks will kill you, Rosa,” there could not be a better person than Rosa Parks for the test case they all sought.
Parks had a long history as a civil rights activist. She first tried to register to vote in 1943 when only a very tiny percentage of Alabama blacks voted. She was told she did not pass the literacy test. The same thing happened in 1944. In 1945, she hand-copied every question on the literacy test while she was taking it, in an obvious first step toward a legal challenge. Apparently, the authorities wanted to avoid a legal challenge more than they wanted to avoid her vote. She received her registration in the mail and began voting in Alabama elections in 1946. In the summer of 1955, Parks attended a desegregation workshop at Highlander. “I was forty-two years old, and it was one of the few times in my life up to that point when I did not feel any hostility from white people,” Parks said.
Given her background, many have wondered whether Parks’s action on the bus had been planned. She insisted it had not. But her life had prepared her for what happened. A few months later, Parks said, “There had to be a stopping place, and this seemed to have been the place for me to stop being pushed around and to find out what human rights I had, if any.”
Parks, Nixon, and the Durrs retained a young African-American lawyer, Fred Gray, as her attorney. Nixon began calling the local ministers. The new minister at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Martin Luther King, Jr., was third on his list. Among the people Gray called that evening was Jo Ann Gibson Robinson, a professor at Montgomery’s all black Alabama State College and a leader in the black Women s Political Caucus (WPC) in Montgomery, who remembered, “Telephones jangled; people congregated on street corners and in homes and talked....[but] A numbing helplessness seemed to paralyze everyone.” Without consulting other leaders, Robinson and the WPC decided to call a boycott of the Montgomery buses when
Chapter 25 Complacenc
lange 735
I
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
The leading clergy-led voice of the southern, nonviolent Civil Rights Movement, founded in 1957 by Martin Luther King, Jr., and some 60 other black ministers, many veterans of the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
Parks went on trial. She, another professor, and two students pretended that they needed to grade papers and went to their offices in the middle of the night. By 4 a.m. the next morning, using the school’s mimeograph machine, they had prepared thousands of leaflets that said:
Another Negro woman has been arrested and thrown in jail because she refused to get up out of her seat on the bus for a white person to sit down....
This has to be stopped... We are, therefore, asking every Negro to stay off the buses Monday in protest.
Between 4 a.m. and 7 a.m., Robinson and her students distributed the leaflets. They finished in time for Robinson to teach her 8 a.m. class on schedule and then distributed more leaflets.
Robinson’s leaflet fell into the hands of the white Montgomery Advertiser, which published news of the plan on its front page on Saturday, inadvertently helping the campaign along. The story was meant to inform the white community what was afoot, but it also meant that every black knew about the boycott. Nearly all of Montgomery’s blacks stayed off the buses that first day. At a planning meeting on Monday afternoon, Martin Luther King, Jr., then 26 years old, was elected president of what would be called the Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA). As president, King was the main speaker at a Monday evening service. He called on Montgomery’s African-American community to protest with courage and dignity. After King’s sermon, Ralph Abernathy, minister of Montgomery’s First Baptist Church proposed that the boycott continue until the demands—courteous treatment by the bus operators and the seating of passengers on a first-come, first-served basis, whites from the front, blacks from the back—were met. Segregation itself was not yet challenged, only the kind of humiliating enforcement of segregation experienced by Parks. From that evening it was clear; it was not to be a one-day boycott. People would wait as long as it took.
Ultimately, it took a year-long boycott of the Montgomery buses to win the victory the black community wanted, and it took a combination of careful planning and inspirational preaching to get there. People needed courage and inspiration, but they also needed taxis and car pools to get them to work. Black-owned taxis offered reduced fares. The ministers organized car pools to help people who needed to go the longest distances.
The nation’s black leadership was not enthusiastic about events in Montgomery. The Montgomery bus boycott was a spontaneous outburst that national leaders had played no role in organizing. Roy Wilkins, the long-time national leader of the NAACP invited King to address the NAACP convention in San Francisco, but also expressed deep doubts about the boycott. Thurgood Marshall openly criticized King, preferring to stick with court cases. “All that walking for nothing. They might as well have waited for the court decision,” Marshall said of the boycott.
But as the year wore on, the boycott had its impact. The boycott received favorable national media attention. Fundraising became easier, and King found himself becoming a national celebrity. The aged W.E.B. Du Bois wrote that, though he still had his doubts about boycotts, if King’s passive resistance could undermine American racism, it would be a huge victory. On June 4, an appeals court ruled in favor of Rosa Parks, and on November 13, 1956, the United States Supreme Court concurred. Early in the morning of December 21, 1956, 1 year and 3 weeks after Rosa Parks had refused to move, King and a few others, followed by reporters, boarded the first bus of the day. “We are glad to have you,” the polite driver said.
In January 1957, King, Abernathy, and some 60 black ministers created the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, based in Atlanta, Georgia. The MIA had been a temporary organization focused on the bus boycott. The SCLC institutionalized the energy and the planning that had started in Montgomery and created a permanent national organization and a long-term platform for King.

736
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
■Ill
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Many Faces of the Civil Rights Movement
Rosa Parks' refusal to give up her bus seat in Montgomery,
Alabama, in December 1955 led to a year-long boycott of the buses, launched the career of a young Montgomery minister, Martin Luther King, Jr., and changed the course of American history. But the boycott worked only because of many who never became famous.
Besides Parks and King, some among the many who made the Montgomery boycott a national event:
• Claudette Colvin—A young African-American who was arrested for refusing to give up her seat on a bus 9 months before Parks but who local leaders thought was not the right candidate for a test case because she was pregnant and unmarried. Her legal appeal was later combined with that of Rosa Parks.
E.D.
Nixon—A long-time civil rights and union activist who commanded great respect in black and white communities in Montgomery. • Clifford and Virginia Durr—White residents of Montgomery who had long supported civil rights for African-Americans at considerable personal cost and who had national connections to help the local organizers.
• Fred Gray—Then a 24-year-old lawyer in Montgomery who represented Rosa Parks. Gray had gone to law school with a private promise "to become a lawyer, return to Alabama, and destroy everything segregated I could find."
• Jo Ann Gibson Robinson and the Members of the Women's Political Caucus—Were already urging male civil rights leaders to protest Montgomery's segregated buses.
• Ralph Abernathy—A respected senior minister and an officer of the NAACP who convinced King to support the bus boycott.
• Mother Pollard—An elderly member of King's congregation who responded to her pastor's concern that she was too old to keep walking, replying, "My feets is tired but my soul is rested." • And thousands of additional residents of Montgomery-Committed supporters who attended rallies, organized alternative forms of transportation, or simply walked to and from work for a year rather than break the boycott.
In thinking about how best to teach the history of the Civil Rights Movement, Diana Turk, a professor at New York University, said:
Ask most middle- and secondary-level students what they have learned about the Civil Rights Movement, and most likely they will tell you a story of great leaders who, through their bravery, and inspiring words, led millions to stand with them in the struggles for freedom, equality, and Civil Rights....But...as engaging and inspiring as this tale of brave and inspiring leaders may be, much is lost when we look at history as a story of only a few individuals and their acts of heroism. As Dr. Adam Green, an historian of the black Civil Rights Movement in the United States, importantly argues, great leaders don't get very far unless they have great organizers behind them; someone needs to plan and announce boycotts and marches, set up rallies, arrange for speeches and press coverage, and spread the word about the events that together make up movements....Not only can a focus on organizers give students a sense of some of the important—and often forgotten— forces that helped shape history, but such an approach also can empower students to see how seemingly small, localized, and unheralded actions can truly change the course of human events.
Source: Diana Turk, Rachel Mattson, Terrie Epstein, and Robert Cohen, Teaching U.S. History: Dialogues Among Social Studies Teachers and Historians (New York: Routledge, 2010).
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
What role did each of the figures described above play in the boycott? How did their efforts reinforce each other?
2.	Construct an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: "The Montgomery bus boycott proves that the most important social change is produced by action on the local level."
tudents and Sit-Ins
>n February 1, 1960, 3 years after the buses in Montgomery were integrated and as )hn F. Kennedy battled to win presidential primaries, four African-American fresh-ten at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College sat down at the whites-only meh counter of the Woolworth’s store in Greensboro, North Carolina. They asked olitely for service and ordered coffee. After sitting at the counter all day, they still had ot received their orders. Nineteen students joined the sit-in the next day, and on the lird day, they numbered 85. On the fourth day, more than 300 people joined the sit-in,
Chapter 25 Complacency and Chi
>7
expanding it to another stores lunch counter. This group action was not a well-planned event. The established civil rights leaders in neither the NAACP nor King s SCLC had been involved and, indeed, knew nothing of it until after the fact. They struggled to decide whether to support, ignore, or lead the sit-ins. But it didn’t matter what they did. The student-led sit-ins that started in Greensboro spread like wildfire across the South.
Before February ended, there were sit-ins in 31 cities in eight southern states. One of the largest and longest took place in Nashville, Tennessee. After hearing of the Greensboro actions, over 500 well-dressed African-American college students walked into downtown Nashville and sat down at lunch counters in all of the major stores. The Nashville police allowed a mob to beat many of the demonstrators, and more than 60 protesters were jailed in Nashville. The mayor sought compromise and agreed to appoint a biracial committee to look at segregation in the stores. The appointment of the committee was a victory long sought by Nashville’s older civil rights leaders, and it had been won by the students. By July, the lunch counters in Greensboro had also become desegregated.
While many of King’s peers were not sure what to make of the sit-ins, and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund was not willing to defend those arrested, King endorsed them, seeing the sit-ins as a way to confront segregation nonviolently and directly. He continued to defend the sit-ins to an older and very wary civil rights community, and the sit-ins continued to grow in significance.
From Freedom Rides to Birmingham to Washington—"I Have a Dream/1963
While the sit-ins continued, the U.S. Supreme Court in a 1960 ruling, Boynton v. Virginia declared that any segregation in interstate transportation was unconstitutional. James Farmer and others in the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) decided to test the decision with “freedom rides” to hasten integration of interstate bus service
The lunch counter sit-ins, launched by these students at a segregated lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, in February 1960, began a new and powerful phase of the Civil Rights Movement.
738 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
and terminals through the South. They warned the Attorney General and the FBI in advance. When the seven blacks and six whites on the two buses began their trip in May 1961, they encountered violence first in Rock Hill, South Carolina, where John Lewis was beaten when trying to enter a white rest room, then in Anniston, Alabama, where one of the buses was burned and most of the riders beaten. All of the riders were beaten again when a bus reached Birmingham, Alabama—one white rider so badly he suffered permanent brain damage. An FBI informer had reported Ku Klux Kian plans to attack the Freedom Riders, but at no point did they get any federal protection. New riders who joined the effort were also beaten and arrested. Eventually, 328 Freedom Riders were arrested in the summer of 1961.
When the new Kennedy administration called for a “cooling-off” period, Farmer responded that “blacks have been cooling off for 150 years. If we cool off any more, we’ll be in a deep freeze.” Finally in the fall, Attorney General Robert Kennedy convinced the Interstate Commerce Commission to order that any bus or train that crossed a state line (and thus under the Constitution became subject to federal rules) could not use any segregated facilities.
In September 1962, James Meredith became the first black to enroll at the University of Mississippi, backed by a federal court order. In response, Mississippi governor Ross Barnett promised that “No school will be integrated in Mississippi while I am your governor.” Robert Kennedy thought he had a promise from Barnett to keep order on the campus, but when Barnett instead whipped up a crowd of some 3,000 whites who began throwing rocks and eventually shooting, Kennedy sent federal marshals and then federal troops, who restored order at the university.
Early in 1963, King began a campaign to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama, perhaps the most segregated city in the South. He expected resistance. King was promptly arrested during a protest—and used the time to write one of his most famous publications, “Letter from Birmingham Jail.” The Birmingham police, under their chief “Bull” Connor also arrested some 3,000 protesting children and turned fire hoses and attack dogs on children and adults. Civil rights organizers also met with violent resistance elsewhere. Medgar Evers, the NAACP field secretary in Jackson, Mississippi, was murdered on his front porch that June. Riots erupted in northern cities in July. Who knew what was coming next?
LM
j

The Birmingham, Alabama, police force used dogs to attack Civil Rights demonstrators, a response that brought worldwide condemnation.
Chapter 25 Complacency anc
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Black civil rights organization founded in 1960 that drew heavily on younger activists and college students.
Widespread television coverage brought an international outcry about the violence in Birmingham, including criticism by the Soviet Union. President Kennedy, who had been slow to act on civil rights, but feared bad publicity especially in the context of the Cold War, introduced his long-promised civil rights bill in June 1963. Kennedy told Congress that “The heart of the question is whether all Americans are to be afforded equal rights and equal opportunities.” To support the proposed civil rights bill, civil rights leaders A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin called for a March on Washington. On August 28, 1963, more than 20 years after Randolph first proposed a march on Washington, and 100 years after Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, over 200,000 Americans marched in the nation s capital and listened to speeches at the Lincoln Memorial.
The keynote address of the March on Washington was delivered by Martin Luther King, Jr. In words that have become immortal, King declared his hope for America in spite of all the injustice that the Civil Rights Movement was encountering. In spite of all the setbacks, King said “I still have a dream,” that the situation in America could change. In the cadences of traditional black preachers, using words from Katherine Lee Bates, Thomas Jefferson, and the biblical prophet Isaiah, King preached the hope that, in America, black people and white people could, indeed, be sisters and brothers.
Martin Luther King’s “I Have a Dream” speech is now iconic, but in August 1963, it took courage to make that speech not only because civil rights workers and leaders were being beaten and killed, as King would be, but also because many would think such hopes foolish and empty. Even as King spoke, it was unclear whether Kennedy or the Congress would do much to expand freedom or pass a civil rights bill.
Martin Luther King, Jr., at the 1963 March on Washington.
The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and Mississippi
On Easter weekend of 1960, some of the students who had been participating in sit-ins across the South gathered at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. Ella Baker, who helped organize the Raleigh meeting, later recalled, “Just as the sit-ins had skyrocketed or escalated without rhyme or reason, so too the response to the concept of a conference escalated beyond our expectations.” James Lawson, who had played a major role in the sit-in movement in Nashville and had been expelled from the Vanderbilt University Divinity School for his efforts, also joined the Raleigh conference. He told the students that their actions were “a judgment upon middle-class conventional, halfway efforts to deal with radical social evil.” The students voted to form their own organization rather than affiliate with either the SCLC or the NAACR Thus, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) was born.
No one did more to shape SNCC than Ella Baker. Baker had worked for the NAACP in the 1940s. Martin Luther King recruited her to the SCLC in the 1950s, but she found herself deeply frustrated by the male dominance of the minister-led SCLC. Her own philosophy was that “People have to be made to understand that they cannot look for salvation anywhere but to themselves.” John Lewis, the youngest speaker at the March on Washington and another SNCC founder, said We all recognize the fact that if any radical social, political, and economic changes are to take place in our society, the people, the masses must bring them about.” Like many in SNCC, Lewis was distrustful of any single charismatic leader, even King. In the sit-in movement and in SNCC, Baker and Lewis found like-minded souls.
740 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Bob Moses arrived in Atlanta in the summer of 1960 to volunteer with SNCC during his vacation from his job as a teacher in New York City. As Moses traveled through the rural South, he met some amazing people like Amzie Moore who lived far from the centers of civil rights activity. Moses described meeting Moore:
He was the only adult I met on this trip who had clearly fixed the students in his sights. It was as if he had been sitting there in Cleveland [Mississippi] watching the student movement unfold, waiting for it to come his way, knowing it had to eventually come, and planning ways to use it in light of his fifteen year effort, since World War II, at making changes in the cotton plantation land of the Mississippi delta.
Moses would encounter more people like Moore on his travels, and they changed him.
Moses learned that while Moore appreciated the legal work of the NAACP, integration was not his priority. His passion was the vote. Living in a congressional district that was two-thirds black, it was obvious to Moore what the vote could do. Moses wrote to the SNCC office in Atlanta, “Amzie thinks, and I concur, the adults here will back the young folks but will never initiate a program strong enough to do what needs to be done.” Thus was born SNCC’s focus on a massive student-led campaign for the vote. In 1961, Moses returned to Mississippi to work full time on voter registration for SNCC.
In September 1961, Herbert Lee, a supporter of the voter registration effort in Amite County, Mississippi, was shot by E. H. Hurst, a white state representative. Hurst admitted that he had shot Lee but was never prosecuted for the murder. Other murders followed.
Even when the threat of violence and murder was not imminent, people who had lived with segregation and violence all their lives were reluctant to challenge the system. In the winter of 1963-64, SNCC developed a plan to bring a thousand mostly white college students to Mississippi to help with the voter registration effort and to focus national attention on the denial of rights in Mississippi. Some SNCC field organizers worried that so many whites would undermine the strength of the black community. On the other hand, grass-roots leaders like Fannie Lou Hamer argued, “If we’re trying to break down this barrier of segregation, we can’t segregate ourselves.” In June 1964, thousands of student volunteers, white and black, arrived for what became Mississippi Freedom Summer to register local African-Americans to vote and to demonstrate to the nation what an interracial coalition looked like. They were met with considerable hostility. Three of the volunteers, James Chaney, a black, and Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, both white, were killed in late June near Philadelphia, Mississippi. There were also tensions within the movement, yet Mississippi Freedom Summer garnered national publicity for voting rights and changed the lives of many who participated.
As more blacks registered to vote, they also organized the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) to challenge the official all-white Mississippi delegation for the August 1964 Democratic Convention at which Lyndon Johnson, then president, was to be nominated for reelection. Just weeks before the national convention, hundreds of newly registered Mississippi voters, having been turned away from the regular all-white Democratic Party meetings in Mississippi, met in Jackson and elected 68 delegates to the convention.
The MFDP succeeded in raising the denial of voting rights in Mississippi to national attention even though its delegation was not seated at the national convention. The convention made Fannie Lou Hamer, a 47-year-old Mississippi sharecropper and spokeswoman for MFDP, a national voice. Bob Moses described the MFDP delegates as “sharecroppers, domestic workers, and farmers who were asking the national Democratic Party to truly be the party of such people while also taking the first step toward gaining control over their lives.
25.3
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP)
A separate Democratic delegation, launched as a result of the SNCC-led voter registration campaign, that challenged the right of the regular, all-white delegation to represent Mississippi at the 1964 Democratic Convention.
Chapter 25 Complacency
ie 741
Fannie Lou Hamer spoke to the Mississippi Freedom Party delegation after they were barred from the Democratic Convention in 1964.
American Voices
Fannie Lou Hamer, “Testimony to the Credentials Committee,” 1964
■J|>hen Fannie Lou Hamer gave her testimony at the national j/W Democratic Convention, she had come a long way from a SNCC voter registration meeting. "Until then," she said, "Id never heard of no mass meeting and I didn't know that a Negro could register and vote.... When they asked for those to raise their hands who'd go down to the courthouse the next day, I raised mine. Had it up as high as I could get it."
It was the 31st of August in 1962 that eighteen of us traveled twenty-six miles to the county courthouse in Indianola [Mississippi] to try to register to become first-class citizens.
We was met in Indianola by policemen, Highway Patrolmen, and they only allowed two of us in to take the literacy test at the time. After we had taken this test...we continued on to Ruleville...where I had worked as a timekeeper and sharecropper for eighteen years. I was met there by my children, who told me that the plantation owner was angry because I had gone down to try to register....
He said, "If you don't go down and withdraw your registration, you will have to leave." Said, "Then if you go down and withdraw," said, "you still might have to go because we are not ready for that in Mississippi."
And I addressed him and told him and said, "I didn't try to register for you. I tried to register for myself."
I had to leave that same night....
[Hamer also described her subsequent arrest:]
I was carried to the county jail and putin the booking room....
I was carried out of that cel, into another cell where they had
two Negro prisoners. The State Highway Patrolmen ordered the first Negro to take the blackjack [a wooden club].
The first Negro prisoner ordered me, by orders from the State Highway Patrolman, for me to lay down on a bunk bed on my face.
I laid on my face and the first Negro began to beat...I began to scream and one white man got up and began to beat me in my head and tell me to hush....
I was in jail when Medgar Evers was murdered.
Al, of this is on account of we want to register, to become first-class citizens. And if the Freedom Democratic Party is not seated now, I question America. Is this America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, where we have to sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily, because we want to live as decent human beings, in America? Thankyou.
Source: http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/sayitplain/flhamer.html, downloaded, July 8 2011
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What light does the document shed on Hamer's motives in registering to vote?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What do Hamer's experiences suggest about the nature of white resistance to the Civil Rights Movement?

742 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
The North and Malcolm X
By the 1960s, half of the nations African-Americans lived in the North, most in racially segregated urban neighborhoods. While the hopes of blacks in the South generally focused on ending the brutal segregation and on winning the right to vote, the hopes of northern blacks focused on ending segregated housing patterns, poor quality schooling, and economic marginalization. One of the most prominent voices for northern urban blacks was Malcolm X. As Marcus Garvey had done for a previous generation, Malcolm spoke of pride, self-sufficiency, and self-determination.
Malcolm was born Malcolm Little in Omaha, Nebraska, in 1925. He remembered the grinding poverty, racism, and violence of Depression Era America.
As a young adult, Malcolm pursued a life of crime and in February 1946, just before his 21 birthday, received a 10-year sentence for a string of burglaries. In his Autobiography he said, “I had sunk to the very bottom of the American white man’s society.”
While he was in prison, Malcolm experienced a religious conversion and joined the Nation of Islam, or the Black Muslims as they were commonly known. When he was released in 1952, he moved to Detroit and was soon named assistant minister at Detroit Temple Number One. The Black Muslims believed that it was important to reject traditional last names—which they saw as slave names since many came from former slave owners—and so Malcolm Little became Malcolm X. His message as a minister was, “We didn’t land on Plymouth Rock, my brothers and sisters—Plymouth Rock landed on us!... It was a mix of pride and separation from white people— the “white devils”—along with a call for total allegiance to Allah and Allah’s Messenger Elijah Muhammad.
Malcolm disdained integration and the southern Civil Rights Movement. While he was gaining fame as “the fiery Black Muslim,” Malcolm was also starting to have his doubts about Elijah Muhammad. Early in 1964, he broke with the Nation of Islam and set off on a pilgrimage to Mecca as is required of every devout Muslim man. In Mecca, Malcolm found himself among Muslims from all over the world. He was transformed by the experience. When a fellow pilgrim asked him what about the Hajj had impressed him the most, Malcolm answered, “The brotherhood'. The people of all races, colors, from all over the world coming together as one'. It has proved to me the power of the One God.” No longer would he preach separation for its own sake. He was not any less militant, but Malcolm returned from Mecca as El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz, a devout traditional Muslim.
When he returned to New York in 1964, Malcolm explained his new beliefs. He said of his experience in Mecca, “In the past, yes, I have made sweeping indictments of all white people. I never will be guilty of that again—as I know now that some white people are truly sincere, that some truly are capable of being brotherly toward a black man.” He was willing to join interracial coalitions to achieve immediate goals and would work within as well as against the political system.
Malcolm was not willing to adopt King’s nonviolence and believed African-Americans needed to defend themselves. In 1964, he met Fannie Lou Hamer. When he heard her describe the beating she had received, he said, When I listened to Mrs. Hamer, a black woman—could be my mother, my sister, my daughter describe what they had done to her in Mississippi, I asked myself how in the world can we ever expect to be respected.. .and we do nothing about it? He was not the advocate of violence that others portrayed him to be, but at one point he said, Let sincere whites go and teach non-violence to white people!”
After his break with the Nation of Islam, he established his own independent Muslim Mosque Incorporated to preach what he believed was a truer Islam than that taught by the Black Muslims. He also established a political organization,
Chapter 25 Complacency am
Explore The Civil Rights Movement on MyHistoryLab
HOW DID CONDITIONS FOR AFRICAN-AMERICANS BEGIN TO CHANGE IN THE MID-1900S?
Laws in the South known as "Jim Crow laws"—regulations that banned African-Americans and whites from, for example, marrying, dining, going to school, or socializing together—ensured racial discrimination. In the North, segregation undergirded the social structure. However, African-American leaders started to make advancements in their fight for equality in the 1950s and 1960s. Civil rights activists protested across the South, making national headlines. In the industrial cities of the North and West, large numbers of African-Americans arrived in the Second Great Migration between 1940 and 1970 as they sought better opportunities than the South afforded them. From these cities, many also began to speak out for an end to racism.
Young black man drinking from a segregated drinking fountain.
SHIFTS IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN POPULATION IN SELECTED COUNTIES,
1940-1950 County	Change, in Persons	Percent Change |
Columbia County, Georgia	-1,108	-20
Cook County, Illinois	+226,822	+60
Los Angeles County, California	+142,672	+94
Quitman County, Mississippi	-2,416 I	-9
Wayne County, Michigan	|	+172,122	+70
Source: 1950 Census, Historic GIS Data: Slavery, Citizenship, & Civil Rights, Teaching American History Project, http://www.upa.pdx.edu/IMS/currentprojects/TAHv3/Slave_Citizen_GIS.htmi.
KEY QUESTIONS
use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions: Cause ►►► What challenges did African Americans face during the era of segregation?
Use socioeconomic patterns to consider discrimination.
Comparison ►►► In what parts of southern cities did African Americans live?
Map segregation in selected urban centers.
Consequence ►►► What was the demographic impact of the Second Great Migration?
Consider the results of this move to the urban North and West.
744 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
the Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU) to advance his political agenda. His top priority, he said, was to submit “the case of the American Negro before the United Nations. Rather than focus on federal legislation, Malcolm believed that African-Americans had a case to bring their continuing marginalization before the UN, and with the support of African and Middle Eastern nations, he was confident they would win.
More important than any organization, however, Malcolm fostered a new sense of pride in a generation of northern African-Americans. He challenged the quality of education in black communities. He led demonstrations against police violence. He called on African-Americans to “control the politics in his own residential areas by voting... and investing in the businesses.” He had a vision of African-Americans making international alliances with the people of the then newly independent African nations and with the Muslim world. As the scholar Manning Marable said of him, ‘ Malcolm s great strength was his ability to speak on behalf of those to whom society and state had denied a voice due to racial prejudice.”
The new Malcolm was willing to accept white coworkers, but not to be led or controlled. He dreamed that the day might come when, “In our mutual sincerity we might be able to show a road to the salvation of America’s very soul.” Malcolm was assassinated by Nation of Islam followers in February 1965. But he would continue to inspire great hopes long after he was gone.
Malcolm X (1925-1965) was eloquent, passionate, a courageously outspoken champion of black people, and a critic of American racism. Today he is an iconic figure memorialized in poems, song, films, books, and operas.
Quick Review Why were organizations like SNCC, CORE, the SCLC, and the NAACP essential to the Civil Rights Movement?
CONCLUSION
The 1950s was a decade of contrasts. For many, they were the complacent decade when Dwight Eisenhower presided over a nation that had won World War II and was happy to move to new suburban homes and domestic contentment. At the same time, threat of the hydrogen bomb greatly influenced U.S. foreign and domestic policy throughout the 1950s, and the space race with the Soviet Union prompted Americans to panic about the state of its education system. Among African-Americans, the many-faceted Civil Rights Movement transformed their lives and U.S. practices of segregation.
During the Eisenhower administration (1953-1961), the United States pursued policies that attempted to minimize the costs of the Cold War, protect the non-Communist world from Communist infiltration, and avoid armed confrontation. Key pieces of Eisenhower’s foreign policy included the threat of “massive retaliation with hydrogen bombs and the extensive use of spying and covert operations in foreign countries. When the Soviet Union launched the first space satellite, the American government responded by creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to manage space exploration and by establishing new domestic programs linking education to national defense.
The 1950s were relative peaceful and prosperous for many Americans. The economy continued to grow, and many experienced a substantial increase in family income. Americans also became much more religious during the period a phenomenon still not fully understood. At the same time, television came to dominate American popular culture. Most of the programming of the 1950s sought to reaffirm the suburban lifestyles of the white middle class, and new 30-second television commercials encouraged Americans to buy everything from Alka-Seltzer to automobiles. The automobile also rose to prominence in 1950s America, giving rise to new industries to support cars and to an interstate highway system. However, America s love affair with the automobile required a steady supply of cheap gasoline-an issue that would come to dominate American politics.
Chapter 25 Complacence
745
In the 1950s, although segregation, marginalization, and political disenfranchisement were commonplace for African-Americans, the modern Civil Rights Movement came into full swing. After decades of court challenges by the NAACP, the U.S. Supreme Court finally ruled in 1954 that racial segregation of public schools was unconstitutional. Civil rights protesters also successfully boycotted segregation of the public transportation system in Montgomery, Alabama, and of lunch counters across the nation.
While the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee worked for integration and voting rights in the South, a very different civil rights leader emerged in the North. Malcolm X became a prominent northern voice for the nation’s African-Americans. He rejected the integration-focused strategy of southern civil rights leaders and spoke of pride, self-sufficiency, and self-determination for blacks free from white interference. Malcolm was assassinated in February 1965, but the Civil Rights Movement, led largely by Martin Luther King, Jr., continued to press for full equality throughout the 1960s.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
In what ways was the United States a different country in 1960 than in 1950? How did domestic and international events influence these changes in American society?
746 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Chapter 25 Chapter Review
25.1
EISENHOWER'S AMERICA, AMERICA'S WORLD______________________
Explain the continuation of the Cold War under a new Republican administration.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
What were Eisenhower’s overarching foreign policy objectives? How successful was he in achieving those objectives?
2.	Cause and Effect
What were the most important long-term consequences of the Soviet launch of the Sputnik satellite?
3.	Historical Interpretation
Why did the United States and the Soviet Union find it so difficult to move past their mutual distrust and build a less confrontational relationship?
A CULTURE ON THE MOVE______________________________________
Explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
Review Questions
4.	Cause and Effect
What were the most important consequences of the surge in automobile ownership in the 1950s?
25.2
253
5.	Historical Interpretation
How did television transform American culture in the 1950s?
6.	Create an Argument
How would you explain the religious boom of the 1950s?
RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS_____________________________________
Analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965.
Review Questions
7.	Contextualization
Why was Rosa Parks an ideal person to challenge Montgomery bus segregation?
8.	Historical Interpretation
How did students and other young people shape the Civil Rights Movement of the early 1960s?
9.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. What were the most important similarities and differences in their responses to racial discrimination and segregation?
Chapter 25 Complacen
Lives Changed
This widely publicized picture of an antiwar demonstrator putting a flower in the end of a rifle at the October 1967 March on the Pentagon reflects some of the deepest divisions of the 1960s.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the unique time known as "the sixties."
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
26.1
NEW VOICES, NEW AUTHORITIES
Explain the growing social protest in books, films, and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
26.2
263
CAMELOT, THE WHITE HOUSE, AND DALLAS—THE KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION
Analyze the successes and failures of the Kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the United States.
THE COMING OF LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Analyze the successes and failures of the Johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office—the launching of the Great Society programs and the war in Vietnam.
In 1960 while Kennedy and Nixon contested the presidency, a handful of white students organized Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). SDS represented a new birth of activism on the part of white young people just as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) had given voice to the activism of African-American students (see Chapter 25). The birth of groups like SDS and SNCC guaranteed that the 1960s would not be as quiet as the 1950s. As Bob Dylan, the best known folk singer of the early 1960s sang, “The times they are a changing.”
Student protesters and folk singers were far from the only signs that something new was brewing in American culture after 1960. New literature signaled the change that was coming. Between 1961 and 1963, three women authors published books challenging fundamental issues: Jane Jacobs, the way cities were developing; Rachel Carson, the pollution of the environment; and Betty Friedan, the “quiet desperation” of many women’s lives. They were not alone; authors increasingly challenged various aspects of American life.
The new president also represented a generational change in American politics. This chapter traces the many changes that some Americans embraced, others rejected, but few ignored as the United States experienced the decade known to many simply as “the sixties.”
748 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
26.1
NEW VOICES, NEW AUTHORITIES
Explain the growing social protest in books, films, and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
Though it was formative for many, the Civil Rights Movement was only one of many challenges to American culture in the 1960s. Writers and artist had often been uncomfortable with the conformity of the 1950s, and their uneasiness took on new forms as the new decade began. Small political movements burst onto a larger stage. The result was a number of books, films, and songs that reflected and helped shape a rapidly changing culture while wide-ranging protest movements, often led by students, changed not only college campuses but also the country.
Books, Films, Music
Jane Jacobs was a writer and activist in New Yorks Greenwich Village when she wrote, The Death and Life of Great American Cities in 1961. In the opening line of that book, Jacobs said, “This book is an attack on current city planning and rebuilding.” Indeed, it was an amazingly successful attack. Reflecting on the books impact, one urban planner wrote, “When an entire field is headed in the wrong direction...then it probably took someone from outside to point out the obvious.” After Jacobs, city planners in New York and most cities turned away from massive highway development, sprawling suburbs, and isolated urban high-rise buildings to focus on smaller, more neighborhood friendly options. Projects to bulldoze slums and build highways were replaced in the 1960s by the redevelopment of existing urban neighborhoods. Jacobs did not bring about this change single-handedly, but her book was a guidebook to a new generation of urban planners.
Two books published in 1962 played a similar role in other movements. Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring is often called the bible of the conservation movement. Other people dating back to Theodore Roosevelt talked about conserving rather than taming nature, but Carson gave the preservation movement a new voice in the 1960s. While most earlier conservation efforts focused on protecting land from development, Carson described in graphic detail what pesticides were doing to birds and animals.
Michael Harrington’s The Other America, also published in 1962, is sometimes credited with launching the Kennedy-Johnson era War on Poverty. Harrington’s was far from the only voice urging a new look at the urban and rural poverty that had gone unnoticed in the affluent 1950s, but Harrington’s book sold over a million copies, and the critic Dwight McDonald convinced President Kennedy to read it. In his own way, Harrington, like Carson and Jacobs, put a human face on an otherwise easily ignored domestic issue. Describing the way poverty was hidden in modern America cities, Harrington wrote, “The poor still inhabit the miserable housing in the central area....The failures, the unskilled, the disabled, the aged, and the minorities are right there, across the tracks, where they have always been. But hardly anyone else is... .They have no face; they have no voice.” The War on Poverty began to change that situation in 1964 and 1965.
Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique, published in 1963, played an equally central role in the development of the new women’s movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s (see Chapter 27). The Feminine Mystique named what Friedan called the “problem that has no namethe “comfortable concentration camp where white middle-class suburban women lived. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, a generation of women found multiple ways to break out of this and other concentration camps.
Each of these books sold thousands, sometimes hundreds of thousands of copies. They were read by college students and people of every age bracket, and were discussed on the radio and television, in newspaper editorials, in sermons in religious communities, and around family dinner tables, bringing their ideas to many who never read them. Each book reflected changes that were already underway and, at the same time, each speeded change.
Significant Dates
26.1
1960	Kennedy defeats Nixon for U.S. president
1961	Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba fails JFK meets with Khrushchev in Vienna Berlin Wall is built
New Berlin crisis
U.S.
Supreme Court's Engle v. Vitale decision SDS
Port Huron statement September—Silent Spring by Rachel Carson published
1963	Betty Friedan's The Feminine Mystique published
Protests in South Vietnam; U.S. Supreme Court's Abingdon v. Schempp decision
John F. Kennedy assassinated; Lyndon B. Johnson becomes president
1964	LBJ announces Great Society
Free Speech Movement at University of California, Berkeley
LBJ defeats Goldwater, elected to a full term as president
1965	Martin Luther King awarded Nobel Peace Prize
Malcolm X assassinated; bombing of North Vietnam and troop increases
LBJ signs Elementary and Secondary Education Act
LBJ signs Medicare-Medicaid Act LBJ signs Voter Registration Act LBJ signs Immigration Reform act
1967	Martin Luther King's Riverside Speech attacking the War in Vietnam
1968	Tet Offensive in Vietnam
Eugene McCarthy's success in New Hampshire Primary
Robert Kennedy enters presidential race
Johnson announces he will not seek reelection
Martin Luther King, Jr. assassinated Riots in major cities Columbia University sit-in Robert Kennedy assassinated Democratic National Convention and riots Richard M. Nixon elected president
Joan Baez and Bob Dylan, singing together at the 1963 Newport Folk Festival, represented a new folk music that was often linked directly to protest movements.
Films and music had possibly even more influence on Americans. In the 1960s, film and music took on a new and harder edge. Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Strangelove portrayed the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union as crazed militarists willing to destroy the world. Later in the decade, Bonnie and Clyde (1967), The Wild Bunch, and Easy Rider (both 1969) showed a level of violence not previously seen in film, reminding audiences that this world was still a very violent one.
Many who had enjoyed the provocative rock ‘n’ roll sexuality of Elvis in the 1950s listened to the provocative protest folk songs of Bob Dylan and Joan Baez in the early 1960s and later to the drug-influenced acid rock of Jimi Hendrix, Pink Floyd, and the Grateful Dead in the later 1960s. Change, protest, and disengagement were increasingly reflected in film and song.
Protest songs and angry movies, however, did not completely dominate the media in the 1960s. The sentimental celebration of love and marriage, The Sound of Music (1965), earned
$100 million, the highest gross income of any movie up to that time. The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet continued to be one of the most popular TV series up to 1966. In addition, the traditional music on the Lawrence Welk Show and the symphonic pop music of Henry Mancini competed with folk and rock throughout the decade. The sixties were far from a unified decade, in culture or politics, but the very depth of the disunity was one of the hallmarks of the times.
The Student Movement of the 1960s
Universities had long been the location for challenges to the norms of the larger society. During the Great Depression of the 1930s, there were many student demonstrations. But the sheer numbers of students and the new attitudes of the baby boom generation who came to college in the 1960s transformed college life. In 1947, as a result of the GI Bill, college enrollments reached an historic high, and they continued to grow in each following decade.
Budgets for higher education grew even faster than enrollments. As sociologist and 1960s student activist Todd Gitlin noted, “By 1960 the United States was the first society in the history of the world with more college students than farmers.” Ten years later, the nation had three times as many students as farmers. Although most of the students of the late 1940s and 1950s had been relatively quiet, the students of the 1960s were not.
Students who had founded the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) in 1960 met at Port Huron, Michigan, in 1962 to draft a statement of their beliefs. The 1962 Port Huron statement, of which Tom Hayden, then a graduate student, was the prime author, began, “We are people of this generation, bred in at least modest comfort, housed now in universities, looking uncomfortably to the world we inherit.” Recognizing their baby boom origins, the statement continued, “Many of us began maturing in complacency, but then, [a]s we grew, however, our comfort was penetrated by events too troubling to dismiss....the Southern struggle against racial bigotry [and] the enclosing fact of the Cold War. ’ The Port Huron statement noted, “a yearning to believe there is an alternative to the present, that something can be done to change circumstances in the school, the work places, the bureaucracies, the
750 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
thinking historically
Rachel Carson's Silent Spring, 1962
Rachel Carson grew up in an isolated rural community 15 miles northeast of Pittsburgh on the Allegheny River. As an adult, she worked for the federal Fish and Wildlife Service while also writing independently, publishing The Sea Around Us, a description of life in the ocean in 1951 .The book was a great success, and Carson decided to then take on a study of the impact of DDT and other chemicals on the environment. The result was Carson's most famous book, Silent Spring, which not only caught public imagination but also changed the way many Americans thought about the environment. Silent Spring was first published as a series of articles in The New Yorker in 1962, then published as a book that same year, and in 1963, aired as part of a CBS television series in 1963. Carson warned:
Since the mid-1940s over 200 basic chemicals have been created for use in killing insects, weeds, rodents, and other organisms described in the modern vernacular as "pests"; and they are sold under several thousand different brand names.
These sprays, dusts, and aerosols are now applied almost universally to farms, gardens, forests, and homes—nonselec-tive chemicals that have the power to kill every insect, the "good" and the "bad," to still the song of birds and the leaping of fish in the streams, to coat the leaves with deadly film, and to linger on in the soil—all this though the intended target may be only a few weeds or insects. Can anyone believe it is possible to lay down such a barrage of poisons on the surface of the earth without making it unfit for all life? They should not be called "insecticides," but "biocides."
Along with praise for the book, Carson was criticized, most of all by the chemical industry whose products her research and
writings indicted. Spokespersons for some of the major chemical companies and even some of Carson's former colleagues in the Department of Agriculture attacked the book as an effort to turn the clock back to a time when insect-born diseases, most of all malaria, killed thousands and wiped out crops causing widespread starvation.
President Kennedy, however, was impressed enough with the book to order his Science Advisory Committee to review it. When the committee confirmed her findings, Kennedy and subsequent administrations took further action, banning the domestic use of DDT. Later in 1970, President Nixon signed the legislation creating the Environmental Protection Agency to consolidate the government's efforts to protect the environment that Carson loved.
Source: Rachel Carson, Silent Spring (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962). Two of the several studies analyzing Rachel Carson and Silent Spring as well as its impact on the subsequent environmental movement: Mark Hamilton Lytle, The Gentle Subversive: Rachel Carson, Silent Spring, and the Rise of the Environmental Movement (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007) and Priscilla Coit Murphy, What a Book Can Do: The Publication and Reception of Silent Spring (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2005).
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
How might Carson have responded to critics in the chemical industry? How might the public have evaluated their criticism? How might people's jobs or political views impact their response?
2.	Contextualization
Thinking about earlier conservation efforts, like those of
Teddy Roosevelt, how was Carson different?
nra
government... .It is to this latter yearning, at once the spark and engine of change, that we direct our present appeal.” The spark and the yearning to believe there is an alternative to the present,” would characterize the decade of the 1960s for many people, especially the young.
Not long after SDS was launched, another student movement emerged at the University of California at Berkeley. In the fall of 1964, the Berkeley administration issued a directive that student organizations that were raising funds for off-campus causes such as civil rights using tables set up on the university grounds had to move those efforts off campus. Opposition to the directive quickly united students. When petitions and meetings with the university administration did not resolve the issue, a group of students, some of whom had spent the previous summer in the South as part of Mississippi Freedom Summer, called for civil disobedience in Berkeley.
Students brought their tables back to campus and waited to see what would happen. Before long, campus police arrived and arrested Jack Weinberg who had been
Chapter
langed 751
sitting at one of the tables, placing him in a police car. Quickly, some 3,000 students surrounded the car, and for the next 32 hours, while Weinberg sat in the car, speaker after speaker used the top of the car as a platform. The long spontaneous rally launched the free speech movement at Berkeley.
In December of that year, at a much larger student rally on the Berkeley campus, Mario Savio, a junior philosophy major who emerged as the prime voice of the student protest during the siege of the police car, told his fellow students, There s a time when the operation of the machine becomes so odious.. .you’ve got to put your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels, upon the levers, upon all the apparatus and you’ve got to make it stop.” Hundreds marched into the administration building to stop the university’s wheels. They sat in for two days until arrested. Berkeley remained a center of student protest.
Quick Review How did student protest, changes in popular music, and the inauguration of John F. Kennedy symbolize the changes coming to the United States in the early 1960s?
26.2
CAMELOT, THE WHITE HOUSE, AND DALLAS—THE KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION___________________________________________________________
Analyze the successes and failures of the Kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the United States.
The student protests were but one aspect of the changes taking place in the early 1960s. The January 1961 inauguration of John F. Kennedy (referred to often as JFK) brought the youngest president elected in the nation’s history to replace the oldest. A new generation was taking charge of the country from college campuses to the White House. Kennedy partisans remembered his years in office as “one brief shining moment”—to cite the lines of the then-popular Camelot, a Broadway play about medieval glory to which the Kennedy’s glamour was often compared. Certainly John Kennedy, his young and attractive wife Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy, and their extended family made for a dramatic comparison with the sometimes dowdy Eisenhowers. They were able to project an image of glamour, youth, vigor (the president’s favorite word, pronouncing it with his Boston accent as “vigah”), and wit. The press loved to spar with Kennedy and he with them. During the Kennedy years, the White House was the scene of gala events, concerts, and dinner parties not seen in Washington for some time. The hopes and expectations for change that arrived with Kennedy were unmistakable.
The New Frontier
Civil rights advocates also had high hopes for the Kennedy administration, believing that the new president, who had gone out of his way as a candidate to support Martin Luther King, Jr., would do more to support the cause of civil rights than Eisenhower. The Kennedy administration created a Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities headed by Vice President Johnson to look into discrimination in hiring. They hired blacks in the federal government, including some in high positions in the civil and foreign service. JFK nominated African-Americans, including Thurgood Marshall, to federal judgeships. During the presidential campaign in 1960, Kennedy promised to introduce a new federal civil rights bill if elected. But throughout 1961 and 1962, no such bill emerged from the White House. He also had promised to end racial discrimination in federal housing with the “stroke of a pen,” but when no order emerged, civil rights organizers started sending thousands of pens to him.
Kennedy was slow to move on civil rights for many reasons. He could count votes in the Congress, and southern Senators with high seniority made congressional action hard to imagine. The Kennedys were also good at gauging voter interest, and in 1961
752 PartVIll Fears,Joys,and Limits, 1945-1980
Jacqueline Kennedy and her husband made the White House a center of grace and culture as in this reception honoring Nobel Prize winners including the poet Robert Frost and the novelist Pearl Buck.
and 1962, not that many white voters seemed interested in civil rights issues. At the same time, J. Edgar Hoover hated Martin Luther King, Jr., and was convinced that he was a sexual degenerate and a Communist. He had tapes to prove extramarital activity on King’s part, if nothing to show that he was a Communist. Hoover also had tapes to prove President Kennedy’s considerable extramarital activities, which may well have made both Kennedy brothers reluctant to challenge Hoover, who they allowed to tap King’s telephones. Whatever the reasons, the vaunted Kennedy vigor was not brought to civil rights.
In other areas, Kennedy’s New Frontier, as he called his domestic policy, was more successful. Working closely with House Speaker Sam Rayburn, the administration was able to win an increase in the federally mandated minimum wage. At their urging, Congress also provided funds for job training and tougher regulations for testing new drugs before they went on the market. JFK was the first president since Herbert Hoover to include no women in the cabinet, but he appointed Eleanor Roosevelt to head the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women that recommended federal laws against sex discrimination. Kennedy issued executive orders ending sex discrimination in the federal civil service and signed a 1963 Equal Pay Act that mandated equal pay for equal work. In part because of his mentally ill sister, Kennedy cared deeply about mental health and, at his urging, Congress passed the Mental Retardation Facilities and Community Mental Health Act in 1963 that funded support for mental health programs.
In May 1961, Kennedy, who had been critical of the lack of interest in space exploration by the Eisenhower administration, advocated a significant increase in funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and made a promise that within 10 years the United States would safely land a man on the moon. Although Kennedy did not live to see the promise fulfilled, in 1969, the nation celebrated that accomplishment.
Ihe chair of his Council of Economic Advisers, Walter Heller, convinced Kennedy that a tax cut would stimulate the economy leading to greater prosperity for Americans and improved standing of the Kennedy administration with voters. Kennedy fought
New Frontier
The name given to the domestic programs of the Kennedy administration (1961-1963).
Chaptei
banged 753
Engel v. Vitale
U.S.
Supreme Court decision that banned mandated prayers or devotional Bible reading in American public schools. hard for the tax cut and won. Nevertheless, the domestic record was disappointing to the administration, which would have liked to see faster congressional action on many of its proposals. The New York Times for November 12, 1963, said, Rarely has there been such a pervasive attitude of discouragement around Capitol Hill.. .This has been one of the least productive sessions of Congress within the memory of most of its members.”
Religion, Education, and the Courts
Just as Kennedy had his reasons for not wanting to deal with civil rights, he also had very strong reasons for not wanting to deal with the issue of religion. As the first Catholic to be elected president, he wanted to steer clear of anything that might imply his religion was influencing his work. But as with civil rights, issues of religion were bubbling.
On June 25, 1962, the U.S. Supreme Court announced its decision in the case of Engel v. Vitale. By a 6-1 vote, the Court declared that schools in New York State could not open the school day with prayer. The specific issue in Engel v. Vitale was of relatively recent origin. As the Cold War led to a fear of “godless communism,” the New York State Board of Regents, which had responsibility for all public schools in the state of New York, recommended—but did not require—opening the school day with prayer. Then in 1958, the board composed a short official prayer, “Almighty God, we acknowledge our dependence upon Thee, and we beg Thy blessings upon us, our parents, our teachers and our Country.” It was as inoffensive as a prayer could be, and any students who objected could be excused when it was recited. Nevertheless, the prayer caused problems. Nonbelievers did not want to say any prayer. Devout believers found such a bland prayer close to blasphemy. When Joseph and Daniel Roth asked to be excused from their Long Island classroom during the prayer because their father asked them to, they were taunted. Their father, Lawrence Roth, challenged the prayer in court. As the case was combined with others and moved through the courts, it generated public attention and anger. In the end, Justice Hugo Black spoke for the Supreme Court majority in saying, “We think that the constitutional prohibition against laws respecting an establishment of religion must at least mean that in this country it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers.”
A year later, the court went further. Edward and Sidney Schempp challenged the policy of the Abington Township School Board (Pennsylvania), which opened the school day with a Bible reading and the Lord’s Prayer. In a 1963 decision, Abington School Board v. Schempp, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that, no matter who composed the prayers, the school board’s practices or any devotional reading of scriptures or recitation of prayers was unconstitutional. The court went out of its way to insist that the academic study of religion, including the study of the Bible “for its literary and historic qualities,” was not only constitutional but also to be encouraged. However, it was not the business of government, the Court said, to lead devotional activities.
The Supreme Court’s decisions provoked a fire storm. Many Americans, Protestants and Catholics, claimed that the court was “legislating God out of the public schools and that historic practices that “had never bothered anyone” were being undermined by an unusually activist Warren court. New York Congressman Frank J. Becker proposed an amendment to the Constitution to allow voluntary prayer and Bible reading. The evangelist Billy Graham said, “The trend of taking God and moral teaching from the schools is a diabolical scheme.” Alabama Governor George Wallace said, I don t care what they say in Washington, we are going to keep right on praying and reading the Bible in the public schools of Alabama.” While Catholics had once opposed devotional activities in public schools, sure that they would be Protestant, now New York Archbishop Francis Cardinal Spellman said he was “shocked and frightened by the court’s decisions. For large numbers of Americans, the decisions were the beginnings of a cultural war that would last for decades.
754
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Kennedy's Foreign Policy—From the Bay of Pigs to the Cuban Missile Crisis
In a private conversation with his defeated rival, Richard Nixon, President Kennedy asked Nixon, Foreign affairs is the only important issue for a president to handle, isn’t it? Kennedy said he really didnt care about the minimum wage ‘compared to something like Cuba. While Americans receiving minimum wage might care a great deal about it, Kennedy s focus was, indeed, Cuba, Germany, Vietnam, China, and perhaps most of all the Soviet Union. In his inaugural address, Kennedy had promised to pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and success of liberty. He came to office a devout Cold Warrior and remained one.
The first test of Kennedy’s Cold War resolve came early. The corrupt government of Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista had been overthrown at the beginning of 1959 in the middle of Eisenhower’s second term. The new revolutionary government led by Fidel Castro was very popular in the United States during its first few months in office. Castro was welcomed in the United States and even appeared on the Ed Sullivan Show. Organized crime, which had enjoyed a haven for gambling and prostitution in Cuba under Batista, was driven out by Castro to the applause of most Americans. However the Cuban-American relationship quickly soured. The new revolutionary government executed a number of Batista supporters—too many, most Americans thought. As part of its land reform efforts, the Castro government seized the island’s large commercial enterprises, including vast holdings of American sugar and oil companies. Unhappy business interests—legitimate and illegitimate—began a public relations campaign against the new Cuban government. Castro’s communist leanings also became clearer as Cuba developed close ties with the Soviet Union. Before long, Soviet military advisers arrived in Cuba. By the time Kennedy came to office in January 1961, many considered Cuba to be a virtual satellite of the Soviet Union. The Eisenhower administration had developed plans to train a volunteer force to invade the island. Influential people, including JFK’s father, former ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy, urged Kennedy to take action. While some advisers had reservations, Allen Dulles, the head of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), was a strong advocate, and Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff approved the invasion.
On April 15, 1961, less than 3 months after JFK took office, American-based planes made an initial bombing run against the island. Two days later, a brigade of 1,400 U.S. volunteer troops landed at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba’s south coast. The plan was for the force to connect with other Cuban anti-Castro forces that the CIA was convinced were ready to rise up against the regime. In fact, no internal revolt sprang up. Cuban defenses were strong. When the attackers called for further air support from the United States, Kennedy refused. He had become convinced that the attack was doomed. Within hours, 114 of the invaders were killed and 1,189 taken prisoner. The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a huge embarrassment for Kennedy. He took personal responsibility for the failure. He also fired Allen Dulles. For the rest of his term, Kennedy would be more cautious and less willing to trust advisers in the CIA.
Kennedy’s first summit with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev took place in June 1961 in Vienna, just 2 months after the Bay of Pigs crisis. The meeting did not go well. Khrushchev gloated over the Soviet Union s success in getting the first man into space when Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth in April. He also made threatening comments about Berlin. Khrushchev seemed to believe that the new president was weak and could be brow-beaten. In fact, his actions only strengthened Kennedy s inclination to show he could be tough. Two months later, Khrushchev ordered the construction of what came to be known as the Berlin Wall to separate the Soviet zone of the city from the western zone and the construction of similar barriers separating all of East Germany from West Germany. German Communists complained that their socialist system provided free education for people who then took their skills west to make more money. After August 1961, no such easy movement, nor were family visits or other travel possible.
26,1
26.2
263
Bay of Pigs
A 1961 invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro rebels backed by the Kennedy administration that was quickly defeated, much to Kennedy's embarrassment.
Berlin Wall
A substantive partition built by East Germany on instructions from the Soviet Union that cut off all travel between East and West Berlin from 1961 to 1989.
Ch^fiM&Lives Changed 755
MEDIUM RANGE BALLISTIC MISSILE BASE IN CUBA SAN CRISTOBAL
Cuban missile crisis
A tense standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union in October 1962 at which each country stood on the brink of nuclear war over the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
An American surveillance plane took pictures like this one of missile facilities in Cuba that deeply worried the Kennedy administration.
By fall, Berlin had become very tense. Some Kennedy advisers suggested that the United States should use force to stop construction of the Berlin Wall. Others wondered whether access would be blocked as it was at the time of the Berlin Airlift. By the end of October, U.S. and Russian tanks faced off in Berlin. Some wondered whether World War III was about to begin. Eventually, the United States and the Soviet Union compromised. Kennedy acknowledged that he would “rather have a wall than a war,” and that the Soviets had a right to build the Berlin Wall. Khrushchev did not try to close off American or western access to Berlin as Stalin had done. While the city remained a flash point in the Cold War, and the Berlin Wall stayed in place until November 1989, the Berlin crisis of 1961 passed.
The third major foreign policy crisis of the Kennedy administration—and the most dangerous—took place in October 1962. Again, the focus was Cuba. After the U.S. failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion, Cuban-Russian ties grew stronger and the Soviets sent more military personnel to Cuba. In the summer of 1962, the Soviets began building missile bases in Cuba that could house medium-range missiles pointed at the United States. As U.S. reconnaissance flights showed proof of the missiles in Cuba, it became clear that a major crisis—the Cuban missile crisis—was brewing.
In this crisis atmosphere, Kennedy convened an “Executive Committee” of the National Security Council. For 13 tense days in October 1962, these advisers debated the next U.S. step. Moderates led by UN Ambassador Adlai Stevenson urged restraint. Why panic about a new missile site, they asked, when the United States had missiles in Turkey and there were enough submarine-based missiles to destroy the planet?

756 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Hard-liners, including former Secretary of State Dean Acheson and National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, urged an immediate U.S. attack on the missile site. A third group, led by Robert Kennedy, opposed a surprise strike, which, RFK said, would make his brother, the Tojo [the Japanese premiere who ordered the attack on Pearl Harbor] of the 1960s. The president agreed with his brother’s position and overruled the hard-liners, but he was also determined to be tough.
On October 22, President Kennedy informed Khrushchev in both a diplomatic communication and a prime-time television speech that the United States would enforce a complete quarantine” against future military shipments to Cuba and that the United States would meet any Soviet retaliation anywhere in the world with a “full retaliatory response. The stakes could not be higher. If a Soviet ship ran the blockade, it would be fired on by the United States. If the Soviets made a military move, the United States was prepared to fire missiles. Many worried that the world was on the brink of nuclear war. The next morning, as the first Soviet ships approached, people held their breaths. Then the Soviet freighters turned around. Secretary of State Dean Rusk said, “We’re eyeball to eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked.”
Behind the scenes, Kennedy and Khrushchev had come to an agreement. The Soviets agreed to remove the missiles in return for an end to the quarantine of the island and a promise that the United States would not invade. The United States also agreed to remove its missiles from Turkey but did not announce its decision. An unthinkable war had been avoided. Both leaders quickly took steps to avoid a repeat of the crisis and new communication systems—especially a “hot line” from the Pentagon and White House to the Kremlin—were set up so there would be no delay in communication in any future crisis.
Some military leaders and Cuban exiles were furious at Kennedy. U.S. Air Force General Curtis LeMay (who had commanded the bombing of Tokyo in 1945) stunned the president when he told him, “It’s the greatest defeat in our history, Mr. President....We should invade today.” Others wondered whether Kennedy allowed his machismo to get the best of him when the missiles in Cuba were no more of a threat than others already in place and hardly worth a world war.
While the crises in Cuba, Berlin, and then Cuba again were the most significant of Kennedy’s foreign policy, the president also faced others. In spite of the 1960 campaign rhetoric in which Kennedy had accused Eisenhower of allowing a “missile gap” to develop between the United States and the Soviet Union, once in office, Kennedy acknowledged that no such gap existed. Nevertheless, the Kennedy administration increased military spending from $47.4 billion when it took office to $53.6 billion in its last budget. The United States expanded the number of Polaris submarines armed with missiles as well as the number of land-based missiles in the United States. Each side had enough missiles to destroy the world multiple times.
The administration created a new “flexible response policy as an alternative to Eisenhower’s “mutually assured destruction.” They gave high priority to creating “counterinsurgency” forces, named the Green Berets, that could engage in small-scale military operations in hot spots around the world. In planning for Cuba, where the administration had a special interest, they developed Operation Mongoose, a secret CIA program to destabilize the Castro regime by contaminating Cuban sugar, causing explosions in Cuban factories, and developing at least 33 plans to assassinate Castro, all of which failed.
In addition to Kennedy’s foreign policy efforts to contain communism, the administration launched a new effort at peace in Laos, support for the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID), and efforts at economic reform in Latin America and elsewhere. Kennedy also launched the Peace Corps, through an Executive Order, to recruit young idealistic Americans to spend 2 years abroad as volunteers working on education and development projects. In the spring of his first year in office, the president, joined by First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy, dazzled Europe.
20
26.2
20
Cl
jves Changed 757
Lyndon Johnson took the oath of office on board the presidential plane flanked by his wife, Lady Bird, and Jacqueline Kennedy, still wearing a bloodstained suit.
By the end of his first term, however, Kennedys foreign policy legacy was mixed. Chester Bowles, who served for a time as Undersecretary of State in the Kennedy administration, said that the Kennedy inner circle were “full of belligerence” and “sort of looking for a chance to prove their muscle.”
A nuclear-armed world was a dangerous place to do such a thing. Nevertheless, in November 1963, in spite of ongoing tensions in Southeast Asia, Berlin, and Cuba, JFK was still immensely popular in many parts of the world, and the world was at peace. The president turned his attention to his 1964 reelection campaign.
Dallas, Conspiracies, and Legacies
The Kennedy team wanted to ensure that Texas, home of the vice president, stayed Democratic in 1964. But the Democratic Party in Texas was deeply divided. There was also deep distrust of Kennedy in Texas by 1963, indeed, even a deep visceral hatred among some Texans. In November 1963, Kennedy dreaded the trip he needed to make to build his standing in the Lone Star State.
After the president and Jackie Kennedy arrived in Dallas on November 22, 1963, they rode into the city center in a
caravan, the president and First Lady along with Texas Governor John Connally and his wife in the first car, Vice President Johnson in the next one. A little after noon, as they passed the Texas School Book Depository, several shots rang out. One wounded Connally. Two hit the president. A back brace he wore for constant back pain held him erect and the second shot hit his head. By the time the president’s car reached the nearest emergency room, the president was dead. A Catholic priest offered the last rites.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson had been right behind Kennedy’s car and quickly understood what had happened. Neither Johnson nor anyone else knew how many people were involved in the assassination or how widespread the danger might be, so Johnson insisted that the presidential party wait until Kennedy’s coffin was brought to Air Force One, still parked at the airport where it had arrived that morning. In the afternoon Johnson, flanked by his wife Lady Bird and by Jacqueline Kennedy, took the presidential oath of office. Then they flew to Washington. Kennedy’s death provoked an outpouring of national grief. Suddenly, the youthful vigor that the president had projected, and the hopes that many Americans had projected onto him, seemed to dim.
Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the murder. His fingerprints were on the gun and he had easy access to the window where the shots were fired. Two days later, another troubled man, Jack Ruby, shot Oswald in the Dallas police station. Many suspected a widespread conspiracy. President Johnson asked Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren to lead a high-level bipartisan commission to find out the truth. The commission’s report—known as the Warren Report—concluded that Oswald acted alone. Not everyone was convinced; no one could confirm for sure the whole story behind Kennedy’s death. Whatever the truth, a very different kind of person became president on November 22, one who would lead the administration and the country with a dramatically different style and set of priorities.
262
Quick Review What were the major accomplishments and frustrations of the Kennedy administration?
758 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
THE COMING OF LYNDON B. JOHNSON
26.3
Analyze the successes and failures of the Johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office—the launching of the Great Society programs and the war in Vietnam.
John F. Kennedy had been born to wealth and had attended Harvard College. As a child, he had met Franklin D. Roosevelt because his father was Roosevelts ambassador to Great Britain. He was elected to Congress as a war hero after his small boat, PT-109 had been sunk in the Pacific during World War II, and he had served 8 years in the U.S. Senate before becoming president. Kennedy was handsome and charismatic, important factors in his election and continuing popularity.
Lyndon Johnson was born to poverty in the Texas hill country northwest of San Antonio and grew up in a small house in Johnson City when there were no sidewalks or electricity. His tough and slightly wild father served in the Texas legislature, trying hard to make ends meet, and his strong-willed mother yearned for a better life. LBJ, as he was often called, attended Southwest Texas State Teachers College. He arrived in Washington as a congressional secretary a year before Roosevelt was elected and managed to meet FDR, whom he idolized and who in 1935 appointed the then 26-year-old LBJ as the director of the National Youth Administration for the state of Texas. Johnson worked harder than any other NYA state director, got important services for Texas, and never forgot the value of government when he saw the New Deal bring jobs, electricity, and hope to people living isolated lives in rural poverty.
Johnson had a long and distinguished career in Congress before becoming vice president. He was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1937. He campaigned tirelessly and worked equally tirelessly once in office, building strong ties and coalitions. LBJ and his wife Lady Bird became a family for the sometimes lonely bachelor, Sam Rayburn, another Texan, who served as Speaker of the House for all but 4 years between 1940 and 1961. LBJ lost a primary race for a Senate seat in 1941 but won the seat in 1948. Once in the Senate, Johnson built connections to the powerful committee chairs. In 1953, at the age of 45, he was elected Democratic leader in the Senate. In 1955, he suffered a severe heart attack, recovered quickly and kept working, kept building coalitions, becoming known for the “Johnson Treatment” when he would grab a colleague by the coat lapels and hold his face an inch away while using anger, humor, and statistics to win a wavering vote. He was highly respected for his ability to get things done in the Senate, even if he was often feared and seldom liked. Few said he was handsome or charismatic. Everyone said he was effective.
Johnson hated his tenure as vice president. Many of Kennedy s inner circle, especially Attorney General Robert Kennedy made sure he was kept out of the most significant decisions. Once he became president, LBJ desperately wanted to be loved as Kennedy had been, but most of all was determined to get things done in a way that Kennedy had not been able to do. On the domestic front, he succeeded masterfully at moving his agenda along before slowly sinking into the morass of Vietnam.
The War on Poverty and the Great Society
In his first speech as president, 5 days after Kennedy was shot, LBJ mourned with the nation, but he also demonstrated a confident leadership that the country was looking for. Johnson told the Congress that he was determined to continue the “Kennedy dream” of education, jobs, care for the elderly, and “equal rights for all Americans. One could question whether, given his focus on foreign policy, those goals had actually been Kennedys dream, but they would certainly be Johnsons. Thus, the first president from a former Confederate state insisted, “No memorial or oration or eulogy could more eloquently honor President Kennedys memory than the earliest possible passage of the civil rights bill for which he fought so long.” Congress was being put on notice that the former powerful Democratic majority leader of the Senate, now president, was determined to see his legislation passed.
263
20
263
C|


20
20
American Voices
Lyndon B. Johnson, “Great Society Speech,” 1964
263
Six months after he had taken the oath of office in Dallas, Lyndon
Johnson gave the commencement address at the University of Michigan. He used the speech to outline a new program—a Johnson program to be known as the Great Society—to improve the quality of life for all Americans.
I have come today from the turmoil of your Capital to the tranquility of your campus to speak about the future of your country....
Your imagination, your initiative, and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where progress is the servant of our needs, or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled growth. For in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society.
The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice, to which we are totally committed in our time. But that is just the beginning.
The Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents....
So I want to talk to you today about three places where we begin to build the Great Society—in our cities, in our countryside, and in our classrooms....
Our society will never be great until our cities are great. Today the frontier of imagination and innovation is inside those cities and not beyond their borders.
New experiments are already going on. It will be the task of your generation to make the American city a place where future generations will come, not only to live but to live the good life....
A second place where we begin to build the Great Society is in our countryside. We have always prided ourselves on being not only America the strong and America the free, but America the beautiful. Today that beauty is in danger. The water we drink,
the food we eat, the very air that we breathe, are threatened with pollution. Our parks are overcrowded, our seashores overburdened. Green fields and dense forests are disappearing....
A third place to build the Great Society is in the classrooms of America. There your children's lives will be shaped. Our society will not be great until every young mind is set free to scan the farthest reaches of thought and imagination. We are still far from that goal....
These are three of the central issues of the Great Society....
So, will you join in the battle to give every citizen the full equality which God enjoins and the law requires, whatever his belief, or race, or the color of his skin?
Will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape from the crushing weight of poverty?
Will you join in the battle to make it possible for all nations to live in enduring peace—as neighbors and not as mortal enemies?
Will you join in the battle to build the Great Society, to prove that our material progress is only the foundation on which we will build a richer life of mind and spirit?
Source: Lyndon B. Johnson, Speech to the Graduating Class, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, May 22,1964, Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Lyndon B. Johnson, Book I (1963-64), pp. 704-707.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What are some of the specific elements that Johnson included in his definition of the Great Society?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Knowing that Johnson idolized Franklin Roosevelt, what parallels do you see between the Great Society and the New Deal?
Later, after he left office, Johnson explained his approach to the presidency. “If it’s really going to work, the relationship between the President and the Congress has got to be almost incestuous. He’s got to know them even better than they know themselves. And then, on the basis of this knowledge, he’s got to build a system that stretches..., from the moment a bill is introduced to the moment it is officially enrolled as the law of the land.” And that was exactly what Johnson did. He made sure he knew who would support each bill, knew what the specific desires were of those who might be brought to support a measure, and knew how to cajole those who did not want to support it. He rewarded supporters with phone calls, personal notes, White House invitations, and special services in their states and districts, and he never hesitated to punish opponents. He came to office with a Democratic majority in both houses of Congress and a nation mourning a fallen president. He used that circumstance, plus his incredible legislative skill, to move significant legislation through an often reluctant Congress.
760 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Johnson s first agenda was the stalled civil rights bill. Everyone expected the bill that Kennedy had submitted to be watered down. Johnson, normally the great compromiser, would not allow any tampering with the bill. He was determined to keep every section intact. He broke with his Senate mentor, Richard Russell of Georgia who led the opposition to the bill, and, instead, made an alliance with the Republican Senate Minority Leader, Everett Dirksen of Illinois. With Dirksen’s help, Republicans and Democrats overcame a Russell-led filibuster. The most sweeping civil rights bill since Reconstruction was passed and signed by Johnson on July 2, 1964. It included not only provisions for equal access and equal opportunity but also specifically forbade discrimination in employment based on race, color, religion, and national origin as well as outlawed discrimination based on sex, a clause that later feminists would use most effectively. The law established a new Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to ensure enforcement.
As Johnson pushed hard for the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he also tackled a broader agenda. In his first State of the Union speech in January 1964, Johnson said, “This administration, today, here and now, declares unconditional war on poverty in America.’ Then in May, he used the commencement speech at the University of Michigan to describe what he called the Great Society, which would be how he described all of his domestic programs. Kennedy had already started efforts to attack poverty in the United States, but Johnson, the New Dealer from Texas, had seen what federally financed rural electrification did to change the lives of poor people and was passionate (see Map 26-1). He idolized Franklin Roosevelt and wanted to imitate him. He also knew that if he wanted to remain in office, he would have to face a skeptical electorate in only 11 months and he wanted to present a solid track record.
The first legislation of the war on poverty was passed by Congress in August 1964. It included provision for many of the programs later associated with the Great Society, including Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA), a domestic peace corps that recruited young people to work for a year serving in high poverty urban and rural settings; a Neighborhood Youth Corps to provide jobs for poor youth (modeled on the Civilian Conservation Corps of the New Deal era); work study loans and grants to support college students; small business loans; community action programs directed at building up grass-roots organizing ventures; Head Start to provide poor children with the same sort of readiness for kindergarten that their more well-off counterparts got at home; Neighborhood Legal Services that provided government funded lawyers for the poor; and to coordinate all of these ventures, an Office of Economic Opportunity. This impressive agenda was only a first step for Johnson, but to do more, he needed to be elected in his own right.
Johnson wanted to not only win election in 1964 but also win with such a mandate that nothing could stand in the way of his programs. Before he could, do that, however, Johnson had to face a divided Democratic Party, a Republican opponent, and his own inner demons. Johnson’s insecurities ran deep. He knew that the Kennedy family despised him. He knew that he did not have their urbane sophistication and that, a century after the Civil War, much of the country still distrusted southerners. He also knew—powerfully so—that he had become president the office he had wanted all his life—only through a terrible tragedy.
Despite his concerns, however, Americans saw LBJ as the sitting president who had taken command of the situation when JFK was killed, and Johnson had no serious resistance to the 1964 nomination. Notwithstanding, Johnson was under great pressure to name Attorney General Robert Kennedy as his running mate. There was a logic to the move; Bobby (as he was always known) was keeper of the Kennedy legacy and his nomination would unite the party. Still, as Johnson later wrote, “With Bobby on the ticket, I’d never know if I could be elected on my own.” In addition, Johnson deeply disliked Bobby Kennedy. He was convinced that Bobby had tried to derail his own vice presidential nomination in 1960. Eventually, LBJ informed Bobby that he
26/1
20
26.3
The Great Society
The name Lyndon Johnson gave to his far-reaching domestic program, which included federal aid to education, Medicare and Medicaid health insurance, immigration reform, and a Voting Rights Act.
Ch|
MAP 26-1 Americans in Poverty. This map shows the percentage and distribution of Americans living below the poverty line at the end of the 1960s.
would not be his running mate and, instead, supported him in a successful run for the U.S. Senate from New York. Johnson selected liberal Minnesota Senator Hubert Humphrey to be his vice president. Humphrey, though more liberal than Kennedy or Johnson, was also deeply loyal to Johnson, perhaps even to a fault.
The most serious challenge to Johnson’s easy nomination came from the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP), in which grass-roots civil rights activists sought the convention seats of the regular Mississippi delegation that had been elected in white-only caucuses (see Chapter 25). Although Johnson was a supporter of civil rights, he was concerned that, if the "regular” Mississippi delegates were unseated by the Mississippi Freedom delegates and walked out, and those from
762 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Cl
Changed 763
One of the most effective political advertisements of all time began with a little girl pulling petals off of a daisy and, as she finishes, the screen morphs into a nuclear explosion and ends, "Vote for President Johnson on November 3."The ad was part of an effective campaign in which Democrats painted the Republican nominee, Barry Goldwater, as ready to lead America into nuclear war.
Alabama and other nearby states joined them, then it would threaten the Democrats’ hold on several southern states. Johnson did not want to risk a repeat of the 1948 Dixiecrat revolt. Neither Johnson nor other party leaders understood the depth of anger that stirred the MFDP protest, nor did they see, as the MFDP leaders did, the way in which the movement represented a new form of grass-roots democracy. Neither the choice of running mate nor the MFDP challenge hurt Johnson’s election chances, but both illustrated deep divides in American politics that even Johnson’s masterful negotiating skills could not bridge.
The Republican Party was also deeply divided in 1964.
The original front runner for the Republican nomination, New York’s liberal governor Nelson Rockefeller, had left his wife of many years to marry a younger woman.
At that point, the country had never elected a divorced person as president. There was also further opposition to Rockefeller’s nomination. Many conservative Republicans were determined that in 1964 the party would nominate a “real conservative,” and Rockefeller’s main opponent for the nomination was a true conservative, Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater.
Goldwater, an affable and tolerant individual, had friends across the political spectrum and spurned personal racial prejudice. However, he opposed civil rights legislation as an invasion of personal freedom. He felt the same way about the graduated income tax and most other government programs. Further, he called for a more aggressive opposition to communism than that taken by Eisenhower, Kennedy, or Johnson, even in places where communist regimes were well established, saying that America, “could lob one into the men’s room at the Kremlin.” He won most of the primary contests, and when the Republican convention met in San Francisco, the delegates were so committed to him that they shouted down Nelson Rockefeller. When Goldwater spoke, he said, “Let me remind you that extremism in defense of liberty is no vice... and that moderation in pursuit of justice is no virtue.” It was just what the delegates wanted to hear. It was less popular, however, with the wider electorate.
The Democrats made good use of Goldwater’s statements, developed a sophisticated television advertising campaign, and painted Goldwater as a dangerous man. Johnson won in a landslide. As he left the inaugural ball in January 1965, Johnson told his staff, “Don’t stay up late. There’s work to be done. We’re on our way to the Great Society.” The next day that work started.
In the spring of 1965, the triumphant Johnson pushed four major pieces of legislation through Congress in addition to a raft of other bills that, on their own, would have been considered significant with any other Congress. The core Great Society legislation of 1965 included federal aid to education, Medicare and Medicaid, immigration reform, and a Voting Rights Act.
Johnson knew that federal aid to education had been blocked for many years by civil rights activists out of the fear that aid might go only to segregated schools and by a deadlock between Catholic representatives, who would not support aid unless it went to parochial as well as public schools, and many Protestant representatives, who would never support aid to Catholic schools. Johnson was determined to break the deadlock. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 solved the first issue since it made it illegal for any segregated institution to receive federal aid. Johnson solved the divide on religion with a policy by which federal education funds would follow the child, whichever school the
25.1 j
.j
1
i
262 5
263
child was in. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act was submitted to Congress in January 1965 and passed in 3 months. Johnson signed it at a ceremony in front of a school that he had once attended, with one of his former teachers sitting beside him.
Every Democratic president since Franklin Roosevelt had also sought to provide federal health insurance, especially for the elderly. A coalition, led by the American Medical Association, fearing government control of medical practices, stopped every effort. However, half of all Americans over 65 had no health insurance and they, too, were a powerful constituency. Within months of being proposed, Congress created Medicare, offering basic medical insurance to everyone over 65. Arkansas Congressman Wilbur Mills, a close Johnson ally, added a provision to the Medicare bill, creating Medicaid, which provided federal funding for medical insurance to Americans living in poverty. For some old and poor people, the resulting Medicare and Medicaid legislation enabled the first visit to a medical doctor in their lives.
Even though there was not a lot of pressure to reform the nation s immigration laws in the 1960s, Johnson was determined to make immigration reform a part of the Great Society. The highly restrictive laws of 1921 and 1923 drastically limited immigration, virtually cutting off anyone from eastern Europe, Africa, or Asia (see Chapter 19). Pressure for change came from New York Representative Emanuel Celler who had tried and failed to get an exception to the old and restrictive “national origin” quotas so that Jews could flee Nazi Germany and who was now determined to change the law (see Chapter 23).
The Immigration Act of 1965 abolished the old quotas though it hardly made immigration easy. The legislation held the total number of immigrants at 290,000 (the number who were expected annually under the old law), but established priorities for education and skills rather than national origin. The law also provided an important loophole, allowing immigration above the new quota for close relatives of U.S. citizens, including foreigners who married a citizen. Although little change was expected when the legislation was signed, the new immigration law represented the beginning of a significant new era of immigration, one that matched and then exceeded the number of immigrants who came to the United States from 1890 to 1920.
The fourth major piece of legislation that Congress enacted in 1965 was the Voting Rights Act. As 1965 began, Johnson did not have additional civil rights legislation on his agenda. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the most significant Congressional intervention in civil rights since Reconstruction. Johnson wanted to focus in 1965 on other aspects of his Great Society and did not relish another round of conflict with Richard Russell and other southern Senators. Civil rights leaders, however, did not mean to take a back seat to anyone else’s agenda.
Martin Luther King, Jr., decided to create a national confrontation around the right to vote (see Chapter 25). The 1964 Civil Rights Act banned segregation in public accommodations and the use of federal funds for any segregated institution, but it did not address the right to vote. In many parts of the Deep South, more than 90 percent of blacks were kept off the voting rolls. As they had for decades, county voting registrars used literacy tests and other techniques to make it extremely hard for a black person to register to vote, and, as Fannie Lou Hammer s eloquent testimony at the 1964 Democratic convention showed, when legal techniques failed, outright violence was used. The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party may not have gotten seated at that 1964 convention, but they had made an impression on many Americans. King and the SCLC were determined to keep the issue of the vote for African-Americans alive. When they selected Selma, Alabama, as the site for a major confrontation, SNCC, which had focused on voting rights from its founding, agreed to join. Segregation in Selma was rigid, despite the Civil Rights Act. The city of 29,000 included 15,000 blacks of voting age. Only 355 of those black citizens were registered to vote.
The demonstrations in Selma, Alabama, and the violent response shocked the world. On Sunday, March 7, as the Selma marchers began to cross the Edmund Pettis
764 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Bridge, sheriffs deputies charged them on horseback, clubbing people right and left. John Lewis, the head of SNCC (and a future member of Congress) was one of several people who were knocked unconscious. Pictures of “Bloody Sunday,” as the day became known, were shown around the world. Two weeks later, marchers, now protected at Johnson s directive by the Alabama National Guard, finally completed a march to the state capital of Montgomery. That evening, the marchers happily sang “We have overcome.” But the same evening, KKK members followed one of their supporters, Viola Liuzzo of Detroit, as she drove black marchers home from the event, and killed her. The country had had enough of this sort of violence.
Only a week after the Bloody Sunday march, Johnson went before Congress to give one of his most memorable speeches. He told Congress and the nation:
This time, on this issue, there must be no delay, no hesitation, and no compromise with our purpose... .Because it is not just Negroes, but really it is all of us who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall overcome.
263
20
263
Hearing the first president from the South since the Civil War speak uncompromisingly of the right to vote while using the words of the civil rights movement’s hymn moved many to tears.
The Voting Rights Act, which with unrelenting pressure from Johnson passed Congress by overwhelming majorities, gave the U.S. Department of Justice the right to intervene in any county where 50 percent or fewer of the eligible voters were registered—virtually all of the Deep South. Agents could monitor literacy or other tests and if necessary appoint new federal registrars. On August 6, 1965, Johnson signed
263
262
263
With the Voting Rights Act, the Immigration Act, Medicare and Medicaid, and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, and a host of other measures, Johnson was doing what he knew how to do best, getting federal legislation, federal money, and federal enforcement powers to address specific issues. He was certainly not without his critics. Many worried that the education funds were being used to expand already bloated school bureaucracies. Medicare and Medicaid seemed to be a huge new federal program that would eventually bankrupt the country. The Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts, though popular, also created disaffection with Johnson and the Democratic Party that would, as Johnson knew, turn many southerners into Republicans.
Johnson’s own personality was also a problem. Although he was a master of legislation and gave some of the most memorable speeches of any president, he was also a very difficult person. He could be crude and cruel, especially to those closest to him. George Reedy, who served as Johnson’s Press Secretary and saw him close up, said, “[A]s a human being he was a miserable person—a bully, sadist, lout, and egoist.... [H]is lapses from civilized conduct were deliberate and usually intended to subordinate someone else do to his will.” Such behavior might be effective when arm twisting was the only way to get a bill through Congress, but they also left precious little reservoir of good will when Johnson got into trouble. After 1965, Johnson got into a lot of trouble, especially in foreign policy.
Reflecting on the Johnson administration, Averill Harriman, a senior adviser to every president from Roosevelt to Johnson, said, “LBJ was great in domestic affairs.... [I]f it hadn’t been for...Vietnam he’d have been the greatest President ever.” In analyses of the Johnson presidency, “If it hadn’t been for Vietnam” is a steady refrain. The war in Vietnam destroyed national support for Johnson and the Great Society. The war divided Americans as no war since the Civil War. Opposition to and support for the war created a new political divide within the country and destroyed many long-standing allegiances. Cynicism about the conduct of the war became cynicism about government itself and eventually all authorities. The war cost 58,000 American lives, and many thousands more were wounded in body and mind in the turmoil of Vietnam. Whatever one’s ultimate judgments about the U.S. effort in Vietnam, it is impossible to understand the history of the United States in the late 1960s and beyond without understanding the impact of that war.
Vietnam
Kennedy’s foreign policy priorities were Cuba and Berlin. Until the final weeks of his life, he did not pay a lot of attention to Vietnam. When Kennedy became president, the United States had less than 1,000 troops in Vietnam, sent to train the South Vietnamese army. Slowly, JFK authorized small increases not only to train troops but also to join them on combat missions against infiltrators from the North Vietnamese Army (NVA) and their allied South Vietnamese insurgents organized as the National Liberation Front (NLF). So called counterinsurgency and strategic hamlet programs were designed to find and destroy enemy forces. Unfortunately, the violence of these missions and the corruption of the South Vietnamese regime under the leadership of the increasingly despotic Ngo Dinh Diem undermined popular support. Diem was part of a Catholic elite minority in a country where the majority was Buddhist. Although his Christianity and his anti-Communism made him an appealing figure in the United States, his despotic and corrupt administration alienated many Vietnamese.
In the summer of 1963, fierce protests were mounted within South Vietnam against the Diem regime. Quang Due, a Buddhist monk, burned himself to death on June 11 to protest conditions, and more protests and self-immolations followed. Kennedy’s new ambassador to Vietnam, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., lost all faith in Diem and, with Kennedy s tacit agreement, supported a military coup against Diem. The CIA-backed coup took place on November 1, and Diem and his brother were killed, something Kennedy had not necessarily expected. And then, 3 weeks later, Kennedy was dead, and some 17,000 U.S. military “advisers” were in Vietnam.
766 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
As he became president, LBJ wanted to use the office to focus on domestic policy. From the beginning, however, he felt he could not ignore Vietnam, and like Kennedy, Eisenhower, and Truman, he insisted, “I am not going to be the President who saw Southeast Asia go the way China went [to communism].” It was a fateful vow. Equally fateful was the fact that, on balance, Johnson himself was as insecure about foreign policy as he was secure about domestic policy. Winning a war was a very different thing from getting Congress to pass a bill. LBJ kept Kennedy’s foreign policy advisers, and most of them were convinced that communism had to be contained around the globe. If communist North Vietnam threatened noncommunist South Vietnam, then, they believed, the United States needed to protect the noncommunist south, however unpalatable the fight might be.
Plans for expanding the war were on Johnson’s desk from the day he became president and, although he eventually implemented them, he did delay expanding the U.S. involvement in Vietnam (see Map 26-3). He wanted to defeat Barry Goldwater in the 1964 elections, and part of his strategy was to paint Goldwater as a crazy warmonger.
He also wanted to get the Great Society legislation through Congress. Even so, Johnson said in retrospect, I knew from the start that I was bound to be crucified either way I moved. If I left the woman I really loved—the Great Society—in order to get involved with that bitch of a war on the other side of the world, then I would lose everything at home... .But if I left that war and let the Communists take over South Vietnam, then I would be seen as a coward and my nation would be seen as an appeaser.”
Johnson convinced himself that being “seen as an appeaser” in Vietnam would lead to new Soviet and Chinese aggression elsewhere, just as appeasement with Germany had led to World War II. He was intimidated by the Kennedy legacy of toughness in foreign policy and was convinced that, if he did not find a way to save South Vietnam, “There would be Robert Kennedy out in front leading the fight against me, telling everyone that I had betrayed John Kennedy’s commitment to South Vietnam....that I was a coward.” For a Texan who had grown up on stories of the heroes of the Alamo, being called a coward was simply beyond contemplation. Johnson’s fear proved to be ironic since, 4 years later, Robert Kennedy would run as an antiwar candidate against Johnson.
Throughout 1964, LBJ increased the military advisers modestly, from 17,000 to 23,000, but he did all he could to keep Vietnam off of the front pages in the election year after the 1963 CIA-backed coup in South Vietnam. The one big exception came on August 1, when there were reports that a North Vietnamese torpedo boat fired on the U.S. destroyer Maddox, Johnson ordered an immediate military response. Johnson also went to Congress and asked for a resolution granting him the right to use all necessary measures” to repel any attacks against the U.S. forces in Vietnam. The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution passed easily—unanimously in the House and with only two dissenting votes in the Senate—and in later years, it was this resolution, rather than any further congressional action, that presidents Johnson and Nixon used to prosecute the war. Only years later did historians discover that there was no solid evidence that anything had been fired at the Maddox, or a second destroyer that had come to aid it, during the August encounter, but Johnson got the power he wanted.
After Johnson’s inauguration in January 1965, the military situation in South Vietnam deteriorated badly—North Vietnamese forces controlled perhaps half the land and people of the south. Johnson’s key foreign policy advisers, especially Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, urged a major escalation of U.S. involvement. Some, especially Undersecretary of State George Ball, opposed escalation but, in early 1965, most were calling for more troops.
In February 1965, Johnson said, “I can’t ask our American soldiers out there to continue to fight with one hand tied behind their backs, and launched a major bombing campaign against North Vietnam to stop the flow of supplies to the south. As the bombing expanded—3,600 runs in April, 4,800 by June—the United States also sent more ground forces to protect the American air base at Danang. Once there, these
26.1
20
26.3
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution
Legislation passed by Congress in 1964 that allowed the United States to use force to protect U.S. interests in Vietnam.
CHINA
Bill Vietnam
Major battles or actions Major North Vietnamese supply routes into South Vietnam NLF-North Vietnamese victory and U.S. withdrawal, April 30,1975
Capitals
U.S. and South Vietnamese
troop movements
“Boat People” refugees after 1975
la Drang
M
Ban Me Thuoi
Nha Trang Dalat
S o u 1 h China Se
Bien Hoa Cholon
Saigon: Tet offensive Jan. 30-Feb., 1968
Hue: Tet offensive Jan. 30-Feb., 1968 ia Nang Ioian
Quang Ngai Dak To
MAP 26-3 The War in Vietnam. Vietnam, South and North, and sites of major battles in the U.S.-led war.
troops also engaged in battle and then needed more troops to support them. Fifty-thousand troops were in Vietnam by April of 1965, and the number rose to 75,000 by midsummer. By July, Secretary McNamara, noting that the bombing alone was not defeating the northern forces, urged that the U.S. troop strength be increased from 75,000 to more than 200,000. Johnson agreed. But he did not want to go to Congress for authorization, fearing that it would disrupt the Great Society legislation. So, he quietly asked for an additional appropriation for the war and announced a troop increase at a midday news conference devoted to other issues. The result was that although Johnson won short-term success for his domestic programs, he planted the seeds of long-term distrust.
For the next 2 years, combat in Vietnam expanded. Eventually, half a million U.S. troops were in Vietnam. Numbers at that level could be sustained only by an increased
768
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
As more and more U.S. soldiers arrived in Vietnam, they found themselves on more patrols such as the one pictured here.

military draft. Deferments became difficult to get, especially for minority and working-class men. Casualty numbers also grew, undermining morale among the troops and at home. Costs mushroomed. In 1965, the military budget was $49.6 billion; by 1968, it was $80.5 billion. Try as they might, the U.S. commanders could not get the South Vietnamese army to play a major role in the war. They avoided battle when they could and seemed to have an uncanny way of knowing where danger was and leaving those sites to the Americans.
As U.S. soldiers did more of the fighting, they also saw less purpose to what they were doing. Troops went out on search-and-destroy missions, and then came back to their bases with little to show other than a list of enemy soldiers killed. One soldier asked, “What am I doing here? We don’t take any land.... We just mutilate bodies.” An American officer, speaking of his company’s attack on the village of Ben Tre, which was suspected of harboring NLF supporters, said, “We had to destroy the village in order to save it.” Destroying villages to “save” them, marching into the jungle, engaging in battles with enemy forces—battles that the U.S. troops almost always won—but then coming back to their bases while the enemy forces reorganized in the jungle were strategies that seemed pointless to most soldiers. The U.S. commander in Vietnam, General William Westmoreland, kept providing optimistic reports. Few were convinced.
Racial tensions often exploded in Vietnam. In 1965, 12.6 percent of the troops were black but 24 percent of combat deaths were of black soldiers. Black soldiers, who knew that civil rights workers were being killed in Alabama and Mississippi at home, believed that they were often being sent on the most dangerous missions. Many became increasingly angry at their fellow troops, at their officers, and at the war.
263
20
American Voices
Paul Thomas Coe, “Vietnam Letters,” 1969-70
263
)
I
^^aul Thomas Coe was a devout Mormon and a student at the University of California at Berkeley. In 1969, he lost his draft
deferment. These letters reflect his experience in Vietnam.
The President of the United States March 17,1969
To: PaulT. Coe
GREETINGS:
You are hereby ordered for induction into the Armed Forces of the United States, and to report to: Local Board No. 31 on April 16,1969, Wednesday at 6:00 A.M. (morning) for forwarding to an Armed Forces Induction Station.
Basic Training
I'm tired of trying to rationalize things in my mind. All my beliefs seem to form a giant paradox. There is no room in my heart to justify killing, I can't ever justify the training to kill, and yet I can't justify copping out. I can't justify desertion although that seems the only logical course of action. I know inside that a time is drawing near when our families will need to draw together and the world will be in an uproar, so leaving for another country is out. The church speaks so loudly against breaking the law, and so loudly for supporting our constituted way of life that I can't justify refusing my orders. I want to do what is called of me for my country, but I can't justify the senseless loss of life.... But with every day I become more conscious of the ominous power we've given the military, and hate it so much more....
Peace on Earth
P.T.
In Vietnam
11 September, 1970
There really isn't that much I can tell you. Rain has begun and the monsoons will be here soon.... Another thing, the chow is sorry. I mean ungood food & I'm sick of dried up burnt gristly cold roast beef, nearly every day. You'd think they'd at least learn how to cook that one thing if that's all they cook, but no not them. By the way have you taught Barb [Paul's wife] to make decent gravy yet?
Miss you Mom. Give love to all.
Paul
24 Sept. 70
Rather than go out with some battalion Recon [reconnaissance] team and sit in the rain, I joined what is called the 3rd Brigade Air Cavalry. It's an instant Recon team. They insert us into trouble spots for a day or two & then extract us... you can take anything when you know they're gonna pull you out in 2 days.
Just got back from a 3-day mission directly west of Hue about 3 ridgelines east of the A Shau Valley. We were sent in
there to investigate enemy supply routes.... Then we found that the LZ [Landing Zone] we were supposed to go to was % up the Ridge and washed out, so nobody could get up to it.
... We made it to the LZ & the Birds [helicopters] were beautiful. After circling for 10 minutes they figured how to get in, but they didn't like it either because there was high ground all around. But they came in anyway about 10 feet off the water ... so I threw my weapon in, grabbed that skid, pulled myself to a boulder and jumped in. Felt good. Let my legs dangle out the door all the way back....
Paul
***
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
08 DEC 1970
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Coe,
By this time I am sure that you have been notified of the death of your son, Paul T. Coe. I want you to know that Paul's death came as a tragic shock to me and to all the men who knew him. On behalf of the entire company, I extend our deepest and most sincere sympathy.
On 14 November 1970, Paul was a member of a daylight patrol in the vicinity of Camp Evans, with the Headquarters Reconnaissance Platoon, when the patrol hit a booby trapped area. Your son was killed by multiple fragmentation wounds when one of the hostile booby traps exploded. I hope that it may be of some comfort to you to know that Paul died instantly and did not suffer....
Sincerely,
FRANK A. LIGHTLE
Captain, Infantry
Commanding Officer
Source: Karen Manners Smith and Tim Koster, Time It Was: American Stories from the Sixties. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson), pp. 27,32,36-39.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Coe characterize the war while in basic training?
How did he view his own military service?
2.	Comparison
In what ways were Coe's letters similar to those written by soldiers in previous American wars? In what ways do they reflect the specific context and experiences of the war in Vietnam?
mi
770 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
African-American troops in Vietnam who bore a disproportional share of the fighting and dying quickly lost faith in the effort.

Ml

263
While morale disintegrated on the ground in Vietnam, public support for the war also evaporated. By launching the war quietly, Johnson had not built public support. Many Americans had a natural tendency to support the president and the troops at first, but that support declined rapidly. Vietnam was the nation’s first televised war. Television did not actually show a lot of combat; many of the battles were at night or far from cameras. Nevertheless, footage of troops going into combat as well as pictures of dead and wounded American soldiers brought the war into American living rooms. Lack of clear progress created doubt. Opposition to the war built with each news report, each draft call, and each casualty list.
While critics have rightly pointed out that no more than 20 percent of college students took part in antiwar demonstrations, and those demonstrations were mostly on elite campuses such as the University of California at Berkeley, Columbia, and Harvard, few campuses anywhere were untouched by antiwar fervor, especially as many students worried about draft calls or felt the guilt at being protected by their student status while friends went off to Vietnam. As the war escalated, those participating in campus-based teach-ins—gatherings at which experts or better informed students taught others about Vietnam—heard mostly from critics of the war. The first March on Washington to end the war took place in April 1965. At that rally, 25,000 people heard SDS president Paul Potter say, “The incredible war in Vietnam has provided the razor, the terrifyingly sharp cutting edge that has finally severed the last vestige of illusion that morality and democracy are the guiding principles of American foreign policy.” In 1966, 1967, and 1968, the teach-ins became angrier and the disaffection with the government greater. As early as 1966, demonstrators were not only calling for American withdrawal from Vietnam but also waving NLF flags and chanting, Ho, Ho Ho Chi Minh, The NLF is gonna win.”
Students were far from the only opponents of the war. The Women s Strike for Peace, the Fellowship of Reconciliation, and the Catholic Worker Movement were pacifist organizations who had opposed the war from the beginning. In addition, more religious leaders began to speak out about the specific war in Vietnam. Catholic priests Daniel and Philip Berrigan and Henry Sloan Coffin, the Protestant chaplain at Yale University, became leading antiwar activists.
Established civil rights groups did not want to risk a break with the Johnson administration when LBJ was doing so much to support civil rights. Even so, SNCC
