Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 357
passed the House, but died in the Senate where Southern Senators were able to block all such measures in 1846 and 1847. A Boston newspaper said of the Proviso, “Asif by magic, it brought to a head the great question that is about to divide the American people.” By 1850, the question of slavery created divisions that cut across party lines, whether Democrat or Whig.
California, the Compromise of 1850, and the Fugitive Slave Act
A new Congress, elected just after the end of the War with Mexico, and a new president, war-hero Zachery Taylor, tackled the complex question of California’s statehood. Taylor was a political unknown. Southerners tended to trust him because he owned slaves and a Louisiana plantation, but 40 years as an officer in the U.S. Army had led Taylor to value the Union. He hated the threat of secession. In 1849, Taylor proposed admitting not only California but New Mexico as new states. California would certainly be a free state, but Taylors proposal left the future status of New Mexico uncertain, though there were virtually no slaves there. By the time Congress convened in December 1849, much of the country was in an uproar, with many in the South threatening secession if two free states were admitted and many in the North willing to call their bluff.
In that charged situation, Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky, long known as the “Great Compromiser” for his role in crafting the Compromise of 1820, tried again. Clay offered a series of proposals that he hoped would pass Congress and avert a sectional crisis by defusing tension in a number of areas. The first compromise would admit California as a state but organize New Mexico under a territorial government with no “restriction or condition on the subject of slavery.” As a territory, New Mexico would have no votes in the Senate, a key concern of slaveholders in Congress since they were certain—probably rightly—that New Mexico would opt to enter the union as a free state. The second compromise Clay proposed would resolve the contested question of the Texas-New Mexico border by giving more land to New Mexico and giving Texas $10 million to pay off the debts of the former Republic of Texas. Since many Southerners held Republic of Texas bonds, this proposal had great appeal in the South. The third proposal abolished the slave trade but not slavery itself in the District of Columbia. Finally, to ensure Southern support, Clay proposed a fourth compromise: a law enhancing slaveholders’ right to reclaim slaves who fled north. The whole package may have seemed to Clay like a careful balance that would appeal to both sections. In fact, most members of Congress from each section disliked it, claiming that it did not go nearly far enough in the direction they wanted.
In the debate that followed Clay’s proposals, John C. Calhoun warned that if California were admitted as a free state, it would “destroy irretrievably the equilibrium between the two sections,” and that Southerners could not remain in the Union. The threat of secession was clear. Three days later, Daniel Webster spoke in favor of the compromise. Webster began, “I wish to speak to-day, not as a Massachusetts man, nor as a Northern man, but as an American.. ..I speak to-day for the preservation of the Union.” It was an impressive speech and one memorized by generations of school children. But it virtually destroyed Webster’s reputation in an increasingly abolitionist Massachusetts where many of his constituents were no longer willing to compromise with slaveholders.
In the long hot summer of 1850, first Calhoun and then President Taylor both died in office. The new President Millard Fillmore, from New York, favored compromise, perhaps more than Taylor had. In addition, a new generation of senators, of whom Stephen A. Douglas was the leader, managed to forge a final compromise close to Clay s proposal. In a series of separate resolutions, California was admitted as a free state; New Mexico and Utah were organized as territories with no votes in Congress, thus maintaining the balance in the Senate; the slave trade but not slavery was pro-hibited in the District of Columbia; and Texas happily accepted the $10 million io exchange for a less expansive border with New Mexico. Most fatefully, Congress also
358 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Henry Clay, John C. Calhoun, and Daniel Webster, three men who had dominated the Senate since 1820, debated for the last time in Congress as they tried to resolve the complex issues raised by the admission of California as a state.
passed the Fugitive Slave Act, which was designed to please the South by giving them the right not only to reclaim runaway slaves but also to demand federal and local Northern help in the process.
There was great rejoicing in Washington in the fall of 1850 when the package passed. President Fillmore called it “a final settlement,” but not everyone agreed. A convention of delegates from Southern states condemned the compromise and affirmed the right of secession. In the North, Charles Francis Adams, son and grandson of moderately antislavery presidents, called the compromise “the consummation of the iniquities of the most disgraceful session of Congress.” Horace Mann, the former Massachusetts education leader who had succeeded John Quincy Adams as a representative from Massachusetts in the congressional seat that was, because of Adams’s long efforts, considered the abolitionist seat, said that the compromise meant the Declaration of Independence applied only to white men. For Northerners, the vigorous enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act would soon become intolerable, and many Southern leaders became convinced that the abolitionists wanted to end slavery not only in the territories but also in the states where it was strong and that the only solution was to leave the Union. No one knew what the next decade would hold, but the most perceptive among them thought the celebrations of 1850 were premature.
Fugitive Slave Act
A law that was part of the Compromise of 1850. It created a new set of federal agents to help track runaway slaves and required authorities in the North to assist Southern slave catchers and return runaway slaves to their owners.
forcing the Fugitive Slave Act
len Henry Clay proposed a new Fugitive Slave Act as part of the Compromise of 50 and Stephen A. Douglas persuaded Congress to adopt it, or when Presidents [more (1850-1853) and Franklin Pierce (1853-1857) vigorously enforced that law, ne of them expected the firestorm that resulted. The core of the new law was not v. The Constitution said
No person held to service or labor (i.e., a slave) in one State under the laws thereof, escaping into another, shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 359
CAPTION!!
COLORED PEOPLE
or BOSTON, ONE & ALE,
Tod are fcereby respectfully CAUTIONED ud advised, to avoid conversing with the
Watchmen and Police Officers of Boston,
For since the recent OttDER OF THE MATOB A AU>£RM£N, they are empowered to act as
KIDNAPPERS
Slave Catchers,
And they have already been actually employed la KIWAPPIW, CATCHIW, AND BEEFING-SLAVES. Therefore, if you value your UBSRTT) and the	o/flie	among you,SA«m
them in every possible manner, as so many JGfOfofJOJt on the track of the most unfortunate of your race.
Keep a Sharp Look Out for KIDNAPPERS, and have TOP EYE open.
After enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act became common, abolitionists posted warnings to African-Americans that whether born free or escaping from slavery, they were no longer safe in Northern cities like Boston.
Even though Northern states had passed “personal liberty laws” in the 1830s that made it harder to recapture a former slave, the Supreme Court in 1842 had affirmed that slaveholders had a constitutional right to capture slaves who had escaped to a free state. Given the number of runaway slaves, slave catching was a growth industry in the United States before 1850.
Nevertheless, the new Fugitive Slave Act went much further than any previous law. It created a new corps of federal agents to help capture runaway slaves. Court-appointed federal commissioners would determine whether a person claimed by a slave catcher was truly a slave or actually a free person. Commissioners were paid a double fee every time they found that a person was a fugitive slave as opposed to a free person, and there was no appeal from their decisions. Finally, the law provided for a $1,000 fine and up to a year in jail for anyone who helped a fugitive slave. Across the North, free blacks were worried, and many, knowing that it would be difficult to prove that they had been born free, moved to Canada before trouble arrived. But the slave catchers, now supported by federal agents, fanned out across the North, seeking escaped slaves, and in town after town, people saw the results. It was an ugly spectacle.
Anthony Burns escaped from slavery in Virginia, went to Boston, and found work in a clothing store. But his former owner discovered his whereabouts, and under the Fugitive Slave Act, a federal marshal arrested Burns on May 24, 1854. Bostonians were incensed. White and black abolitionists attacked the courthouse where Burns was held, and a federal marshal was killed in the melee. President Pierce ordered marines, cavalry, and artillery to Boston to ensure that the Fugitive Slave Act was enforced. On June 2, 1854, federal troops marched Burns in chains through the streets of Boston to a Coast Guard ship that was waiting in Boston harbor to take him back to slavery in Virginia. Huge
crowds watched the spectacle, church bells tolled, and flags flew upside down. Pierce had upheld the law, but he had lost the respect of many of the nations citizens. Amos A. Lawrence, one of the richest men in Massachusetts and a conservative Whig, was a changed man after watching the Burns affair. He said that he and many of his friends “went to bed one night old fashioned, conservative, Compromise Union Whigs & waked up stark mad Abolitionists.” Lawrence was far from alone. Happily for Burns, his Boston supporters eventually purchased his freedom. Nevertheless, the sight of this man being marched by U.S. troops back to slavery on the streets of Boston was indelible for many who saw and heard about it.
Similar incidents happened across the North. In Ohio, Margaret Garner, an escaped slave who had crossed the Ohio River from Kentucky, discovered slave catchers at her door, and she tried to kill her children rather than allow them to be returned to slavery. One of the children died. Garner was sold back to slavery in New Orleans. For Northerners, these sorts of events undermined the notion that they were living in free states. Many concluded that freedom could not exist in a nation that allowed slavery anywhere.
Southern defenders of slavery and even their nonslaveholding neighbors were similarly coming to the conclusion that slave states and free states could not remain in the same country. The divisive issue could not be contained by compromise. Federal law had banned the international slave trade since 1808, but smugglers found ways to flout that ban and bring new slaves directly from Africa. Northerners likewise flouted the Fugitive Slave Act. When the best known of the Southern slave smugglers, Charles A. L. Lamar, was tried in federal court for smuggling slaves into the United States, a Southern newspaper asked, What is the difference between a Yankee violating the fugitive slave law in the North and a Southern man violating...the law against the
360 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
African slave trade in the South? In the 1850s, the vigorous enforcement of some laws and the flouting of others angered many Americans, but they differed greatly on which laws they wanted enforced and which flouted.
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Anger at the Fugitive Slave Act also convinced Harriet Beecher Stowe, already a well-known author, to do something for the antislavery cause. As the Fugitive Slave Act took effect, Stowe wrote that the time is come when even a woman or a child who can speak a word for freedom and humanity is bound to speak.” And speak she did.
Although she was living in Brunswick, Maine, at the time, Stowe had spent many years in Cincinnati, Ohio, and had herself seen slavery directly across the Ohio River in Kentucky. Cincinnati—a city that faced the Ohio River and from which one could see the slave state of Kentucky on the far shore—was itself home to many fugitives from slavery. She began writing what would become Uncle Tom's Cabin. It was first published in serial form in the National Era in 1851 and 1852 and then as a book. Within a year, 310,000 copies were in print, making it the bestselling book of the century, other than the Bible. What seems to modern readers to be an unrealistic and sentimental story of Uncle Tom, the ever-patient and kind slave, his evil owner Simon Legree, and heroic Eliza Harris, the slave mother who jumps on ice floes in
13.1
135,000 SETS, 270,000 TQIOMES SOLI.
UNCLE TOMS CABIN
EDITION TOR THE MILLION.
WWUHli IN 1 V*. « W CENTS. IN LEHMAN. IN I PR,,R
58 TENTS. -	-	IN 2 Uls, CLOTH, * PLATES, PRICE SI-HL
>rn. huthhtb. OTiwi. b i >«-	™'"«
PRICKS PROM «*-OO TO OA.OO.
The GreatestBookof the Age.
fob sale
Selling 300,000 copies, Uncle Tom's Cabin was one of the best selling books of the century and helped to galvanize Northern opinion against slavery.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 361
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Uncle Tom's Cabin
Early in Uncle Tom's Cabin, Stowe described her heroine Eliza's decision to run away from a Kentucky plantation after hearing that her young son was about to be sold away from her and the family to a new owner:
It is impossible to conceive of a human creature more wholly desolate and forlorn than Eliza, when she turned her footsteps from Uncle Tom's cabin.
Her husband's suffering and dangers, and the danger of her child, all blended in her mind, with a confused and stunning sense of the risk she was running, in leaving the only home she had ever known, and cutting loose from the protection of a friend whom she loved and revered. Then there was the parting from every familiar object....But stronger than all was maternal love, wrought into a paroxysm of frenzy by the near approach of a fearful danger. Her boy was old enough to have walked by her side, and, in an indifferent case, she would only have led him by the hand; but now the bare thought of putting him out of her arms made her shudder, and she strained him to her bosom with a convulsive grasp, as she went rapidly forward....
If it were your Harry, mother, or your Willie, that were going to be torn from you by a brutal trader, tomorrow morning,—if you had seen the man, and heard that the papers were signed and delivered, and you had only from twelve o'clock till morning to make good your escape,—how fast could you walk?
For many Americans, Eliza's fear and determination made the reality of slavery come alive in ways that decades of antislavery publications and true-life stories had not. What a modern reader reads as melodrama, readers of the time found compelling.
Source: Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, or, Life among the lowly (Boston: J.P. Jewett, 1852).
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
How does Stowe transform the slavery question from an abstract political issue into a personal tragedy?
2.	Contextualization
How does Stowe build understanding for Eliza and therefore for all slaves in this short passage.
RVVl
the Ohio River to escape pursuing slave catchers, was not only a literary but also a political phenomenon in the 1850s and 1860s. If any one book brought home a picture of slavery to moderate or ambivalent Northerners it was Uncle Tom's Cabin.
The book also enraged the South. De Bow's Southern and Western Review, one of the nation’s largest proslavery publications, said the novel was “insulting to the South, because Mrs. Stowe wants the world to believe that all she has written is true!” In the turmoil of the 1850s, however, the book galvanized antislavery opinion not only in the North but also in England where it was credited with playing a role in keeping Britain neutral during the Civil War. The book angered both Southerners who rationalized slavery and Northerners, many of whom first saw the nature of slavery through its pages.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854
Developments in the early 1850s proved how wrong President Fillmore had been to think that the Compromise of 1850 was a “final settlement” of North-South tensions. The Fillmore administrations enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act exacerbated antislavery opinion across the North and probably cost Fillmore the Whig nomination for president. In the 1852 elections, the Whigs, deeply divided between North and South, voted on 53 ballots before finally nominating another war hero, General Winfield Scott. An almost equally divided Democratic Party nominated Franklin Pierce of New Hampshire, whom many in the South considered “as reliable as Calhoun himself”
362 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
on the issue of slavery because, they thought, he would win the White House for them by sweeping the South. The Democrats’ gamble paid off; Pierce won and enforced the Fugitive Slave Act as actively as Fillmore.
Despite that highly tense political atmosphere, Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois hoped to get federal support for a transcontinental railroad from Chicago to the Pacific Coast. A railroad did not seem to be something that would immediately stir up the tensions swirling around slavery, but it soon did. As one step toward organizing the railroad, Douglas and Congressman William A. Richardson, a fellow Illinois Democrat, introduced bills into Congress in 1853 that would organize the remaining land in the Louisiana Purchase north of the Arkansas River into what they called the Nebraska Territory to facilitate awarding a right-of-way for the railroad (see Map 13-1).
Southern senators feared an effort to create another free state out of Nebraska and blocked the bill. After several failed efforts at compromise, Douglas proposed to split Nebraska into two territories—Nebraska and Kansas—and allow each territory to decide whether to allow slavery. He called this approach “popular sovereignty”— letting each state or territory decide for itself whether to allow or ban slavery in its jurisdiction. Others had used the term before him, but Douglas became its most prominent proponent. The term sounded democratic—as least for white voters—but

popular sovereignty
A solution to the slavery crisis suggested by Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan by which territorial residents, not Congress, would decide slavery's fate in any proposed new state.
C A NAD A
OREGON
TERRITORY
UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY
MINNESOTA , TERRITORY
VERMONT
MAINE
IOWA
CALIFORNIA (admitted free,
\ 1850)
UTAH TERRITORY
(1850) ■ ILLINOIS
NEW HAMPSHIRE
f^SACHVSETTS Z..x" .	" . ■	RHODE ISLAND
Connecticut
OHIO ■	JEW JERSEY
INDIANA	;
NEW YORK
PACIFIC
OCEAN
NEW MEXICO TERRITORY
INDIAN X V VIRGINIA
R. TERRITORY
TENNESSEE CAROUNA
Delaware X- ^MARYLAND
TEXAS
(claimed, ' ,836-50)
[~..| Free states and territories
I
Slave states [,	] To be decided by popular sovereignty
— “ Missouri Compromise line
MEXICO
TEXAS ' (after 1850)
LOUIS,
? 05
z £
ALABAMA
litH
Gulf of Mexico
SOUTH
CAROLINA GEORGIA
iSlK-
,/
ATLANTIC
OCEAN



%

3?
\ T \
1AP13-, The Compromise of 1850 and the Kansas-NebraskaAct. The Compromise of! 850 admitted aiif„ 'neuompromis	, h New Mexico and Utah Territories. Three years later,
rma as a free state and se	Unorganized Territory between Minnesota and Oregon
enator Stephen A. Douglas P^posed	th abo t whether the territory might eventually become
hat set off a firestorm in Congress and the country about wrieu.
lave or free states.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 363
1 •
Kansas-Nebraska Act
A law passed in 1854 creating the Kansas and Nebraska Territories but leaving the question of slavery open to local residents.
Republican Party
A new political party created in 1854 that was dedicated to stopping the spread of slavery in any place in the nation where it did not exist.
it explicitly repealed the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which banned slavery north of Missouri no matter what local residents said. Ihe proposal to split the Nebraska Territory and allow popular sovereignty to overrule the Missouri Compromise got Douglas the support he needed from Southern senators, but it also raised “a hell of a storm,” as Douglas knew it would. For many moderates, even for President Pierce, the Missouri Compromise had held the Union together for 34 years, almost half the nation’s lifetime. Tampering with it seemed dangerous. Douglas was offering to repeal it to be able to organize the new territories that he thought were essential to his plans for a railroad. The risk was that repealing the Missouri Compromise could allow slavery, if the local voters supported it, in territory where it had been banned since 1820. While defenders of slavery were delighted, Northern abolitionists and moderates saw taking this risk as another step toward spreading slavery throughout the Union, something they found unacceptable.
Northern outrage was intense. The most moderate free-soil advocates who opposed extending slavery united with the most radical abolitionists in opposition. Five state legislatures and hundreds of meetings and conventions sent petitions to Congress declaring, “This crime shall not be consummated.” Whig Senator William Pitt Fessenden of Maine called the Kansas-Nebraska bill “a terrible outrage.” On the other hand, Southerners of both parties strongly supported the Kansas-Nebraska Act. In the end, the bill passed in 1854, Pierce signed it, and Douglas got his territory, but he also virtually destroyed the Whig Party.
The Congressional Elections of 1854 and the Birth of the Republican Party
The Kansas-Nebraska Act became the defining issue in the 1854 elections for Congress. Battles between antislavery and proslavery factions within Kansas dominated the national news for the next several years. In 1854, northern Whigs, led by Senator William H. Seward of New York, along with members of the declining Free Soil Party came together to create the Republican Party. Many former Whigs and members of smaller parties campaigned for office as Republicans—members of a brand new party—in the 1854 congressional elections, and the Republicans, not the Whigs, would nominate candidates for president in 1856 and 1860. Southern and proslavery Whigs tried to maintain their party for a few years, but what had been a major political party in the United States since it was organized to oppose Andrew Jackson disappeared during the 1850s.
In Illinois, a former one-term Whig Congressman, Abraham Lincoln, was “aroused...as he had never been before” by the Kansas-Nebraska Act and began a campaign for a seat in the U.S. Senate that would allow him to oppose the act on the national stage. Stephen A. Douglas, in the middle of his own 6-year term as the other senator from Illinois (since all states elect two senators for 6-year terms at different times), opposed Lincoln, hoping instead for a fellow Democrat to join him in the Senate. Since U.S. Senators were elected by state legislatures at that time, not by popular votes, the 1854 senatorial campaign was actually a race among candidates for the Illinois legislature, who would then elect the new U.S. Senator. Everyone understood that, if the Democrats won a majority of the state legislature, they would elect a Democrat to join Douglas, but if the winning majority was the emerging Republican Party, supported by the remnants of the Whig Party, they would, many expected, elect Lincoln.
In the fall of 1854, Lincoln and Douglas campaigned throughout the state to support the candidates they favored for the Illinois legislature. Lincoln was a moderate, far too moderate for many abolitionists, and he remained a Whig throughout the 1854 campaign, choosing at that time not to join the new Republican Party; however, his opposition to the spread of slavery was growing stronger. He argued that while the Constitution protected slavery in the states where it existed, it “furnishes no more
164 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
excuse for permitting slavery to go into our own free territory, than it would for reviving the African slave trade. When Douglas defended his long-standing policy of “popular sovereignty and the sacred right of self-government,” Lincoln responded, “when the white man governs himself that is self-government; but when he governs himself and also governs another man...that is despotism.” Lincoln said that he understood that ending slavery where it existed was difficult, but he also insisted that there could be no moral right for anyone to enslave any other person.
Lincoln s coalition won the majority of the Illinois legislature, but the coalition included former Democrats who would not vote for a Whig like Lincoln. In the end, Lincoln backed Lyman Trumbull, a former Democrat turned Republican, for the Senate rather than allow a Democrat to win. But during the 1854 campaign, Lincoln had established himself as a national actor on the political stage. The speeches that both Lincoln and Douglas made were a preview of the more formal debates that would take place between them 4 years later when Lincoln campaigned directly against Douglas in an effort to win his seat in the Senate.
Across the North, the 1854 election led to victories by anti-Kansas-Nebraska Act coalitions in state after state. Democrats lost control of most Northern state legislatures. The majority of the members of the Senate were not up for election in 1854 but the state of Wisconsin elected the first Republican to serve in that body. More significant changes came in the House of Representatives—the members of which are elected for 2-year terms directly by the voters, not by state legislatures. Northern Democrats dropped from 93 to 23 seats in the House of Representatives while Southern Democrats held 58 seats. But 150 members of Congress were now committed to stopping slavery in the territories, some as Whigs, some as Republicans, and some as members of minor parties. Since the formation of the Jacksonian Democrats and Whig opposition in the 1830s, leaders had changed party affiliations on occasion in response to strong issues, but never as often as they did in the 1850s as the old parties weakened. After 1854, voters—South and North—cared mostly about whether candidates were anti- or proslavery and whether they were moderate or radical in their views. The Kansas-Nebraska Act had unified Northern political opinion against the spread of slavery as nothing before it had done. A new political party, the Republican Party, was forming to speak for that point of view. Unlike the Whigs or the Democrats, both of which included Northern and Southern members, the Republican Party represented only one section of the nation and one political perspective. Ihe party had virtually no Southerners and no one who spoke for popular sovereignty or any other plan to allow the growth of slavery. When the new Congress assembled in late 1855, the House eventually elected as its new Speaker, Nathaniel P. Banks of Massachusetts, a former Know Nothing who had recently switched his political allegiance to the Republican Party. A representative of a political party that had not existed 2 years earlier now held the gavel in the House of Representatives.
13.2
j
Quick Review How did the escalation of hostility over slavery indicate the issue could not be settled peacefully?
BLEEDING KANSAS AND DRED SCOTT V. SANDFORD
■H
of the battle over slavery in Kansas and the Supreme
and the impact of those events on public opinion.
Analyze the causes and consequences Court's decision in the Dred Scott case
The Kansas-Nebraska Act, however, was still the law of the land in spite of the
outcome of the 1854 elections. The act essentially split the former unorganized
territory in half (see Map 13-1). The southern portion was the modern state of
Kansas and the northern, called Nebraska, included the modern states of Nebraska,
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation
365
Lecompton Constitution
Proslavery draft written in 1857 by Kansas territorial delegates elected under questionable circumstances; it what was decisively defeated by Congress.
In 1854 and 1855, thousands of "Missouri Ruffians" as their opponents called them arrived in Kansas, well armed and determined to control the territory. Before long, equally well-armed abolitionists from the North began arriving in the territory. Given the presence of so many guns and such anger, it was not surprising that bloodshed quickly followed.
66 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
South Dakota, and North Dakota. Kansas and Nebraska each now had to decide whether to apply for admission to the Union as slave or free states. No one was sure when elections would be held or who would vote, though many wanted to control the outcome. While Nebraska stayed relatively calm, Kansas, with its proximity to the slave state of Missouri but also within easy travel of the free states of Illinois and Iowa was easier for Southerners and Northerners to move to. It quickly became a dangerous and violent place.
Even before President Pierce appointed Andrew Reeder, a Pennsylvania Democrat, as territorial governor, hundreds of proslavery “border ruffians” from Missouri and abolitionists from the North began pouring into Kansas. The Missourians got there first and when the first elections were held for the territorial representative to Congress in November 1854, they won easily. They also gained a majority of the territorial legislature that was elected in March 1855. The proslavery faction could probably have won these early elections fairly, but the votes were accompanied by widespread cheating, fraudulent vote counting, votes by people who still resided in Missouri, and voter intimidation. So the results were challenged even as more antislavery voters began arriving in larger numbers and quickly came to outnumber the proslavery advocates.
In response to the first elections, the settlers who supported admitting Kansas as a free state called a convention in December 1855 in which they declared the territorial legislature elected in March to be illegitimately elected. They then held their own election, established their own legislature to meet at Topeka, adopted a state constitution (the Topeka Constitution), and elected their own governor. Thus by January 1856, Kansas had two legislatures and two governors as well as sent two different territorial representatives to Congress. For the most part, each faction voted in its own elections and boycotted the elections called by the other.
In 1856, U.S. troops under orders from President Pierce, dispersed the Topeka legislature since it lacked any legal mandate to meet, and the “official” legislature called a convention to write a state constitution. A new federal governor, Robert Walker, finally began to establish order in the territory and convinced both sides that an honest election could be held. In the October y	1857 elections—probably the most honest in the territory—in
which both factions voted for the first time, the free-state faction won a sizeable majority. But while the free-state majority now controlled the legislature, the constitutional convention, which had been appointed by the previous proslavery legislature, continued to write a constitution. The situation in Kansas then got even more complicated.
The proslavery convention at Lecompton, Kansas, that wrote what came to be known as the Lecompton Constitution finished its work in the fall of 1857, and a vote on the constitution was called for December. However, the convention decreed that the vote was only on the clause that would decide whether Kansas would be a slave or a free state. Free-state residents were convinced that the whole Lecompton document was a fatally flawed defense of slavery: even if voters made Kansas a free state, the Lecompton document said that slaves already in the territory were bound to remain slaves. They boycotted the election, and the proslavery clause won by a vote of 6,226 to 569. Then the new legislature called for a vote on the whole constitution in January 1858. Proslavery residents boycotted this election, and the constitution was defeated by a vote of 10,226 to 162. Both votes were then sent forward to Congress to sort out.
After another long and bitter debate on Kansas in the late spring of 1858—this time with Douglas in opposition to admitting Kansas as a slave state because of the “trickery and juggling Congress called for a new vote in Kansas on the Lecompton Constitution. The legislation said that if the constitution passed, Kansas would gain immediate statehood, but if it did not, statehood would be delayed significantly. In August 1858, Kansas voters defeated the Lecompton Constitution and the offer of immediate statehood by a vote of 11,300 to 1,788. Kansas would remain a territory until 1861.
The 4-year battle from 1854 to 1858 gave the territory the name of Bleeding Kansas and hardened public opinion North and South. The battle in Kansas not only was confusing but also was violent. Missouri “border ruffians” and Missouri militia intimidated and killed free-state voters. But the violence was not all on one side. Samuel Jones, the country sheriff for Lawrence, Kansas, was shot while trying to serve warrants on the free-state leaders. He survived and led the militia back to town to take prisoners and demolish a hotel, a newspaper office, and the home of the free-state governor. His successor threatened the free-state legislature in 1857 and was killed.
John Brown came to Kansas to “strike terror in the hearts of the proslavery people.” Brown attacked a small proslavery community near Pottawatomie Creek and killed and mutilated five settlers. The battles continued in 1856 and 1857. Missourians boarded steamboats on the Missouri River to search for antislavery immigrants. Both sides claimed their martyrs. In most parts of the territory, the U.S. Army slowly asserted control, but just before the final resolution in May 1858, proslavery guerrillas shot nine unarmed free-state farmers, and five of them died.
The violence was not limited to Kansas. In Washington, Congressman Preston Brooks of South Carolina, who believed that protecting the status of Kansas as a slave state was a “point of honor,” badly beat Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner in the Senate chamber after Sumner delivered his “Crime Against Kansas” speech favoring a free-state Kansas. In Brooklyn, New York, the nation’s most famous
Bleeding Kansas
Violence between pro- and antislavery forces in Kansas Territory after the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854.
1J.1
13.2
133
13 A
cZXXX Brooks of south Carolina was enraged by IXkTn S hoX? antislavery arguments during the debates about Kansas, which Brooks took an attack on the honor of his family andthe South. In May 1856, Brooks came into the Senate chamber and beat Sumner w,th a cane while h/sat at his desk. Sumner never fully recovered from his injuries but remamed ,n the Senate as a staunch Republican through the Civil War and Reconstruction until he died in 1874.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 367
Dred Scott v. Sandford
A
Supreme Court case brought by Dred Scott, a slave demanding his freedom based on his residence in a free state and a free territory with his master. After the Supreme Court's decision on the Dred Scott case, many Americans, North and South, concluded that slavery had to be banned everywhere or nowhere.
preacher, Henry Ward Beecher, warned of the need to “stand firm, and collected funds for “Beecher’s Bibles,” which were Springfield rifles to be sent to Kansas. Even after the nation turned to other matters, few Americans forgot the intense emotions Kansas aroused.
The Supreme Court and Dred Scott
While the battle for Kansas transfixed the nation, a court case was making its way through the nations slow judicial process. Ihe case, Dred Scott v. Sandford, resulted in one of the most far-reaching decisions in the history of the Supreme Court. It began in state courts in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1846 when abolitionists urged Dred Scott, a slave, to sue for his freedom because his owner, an army surgeon, had taken him to Illinois and then on to Fort Snelling in what is now Minnesota (then simply the northern tip of the Louisiana Purchase where the Missouri Compromise banned slavery). After living for years in free territory, his lawyers claimed, Scott had won his freedom.
In a series of trials and appeals, Scott’s case went back and forth. Scott lost the first time, but on retrial in state court in St. Louis, he won his freedom. The Missouri Supreme Court then overturned the decision on appeal in 1852 and returned Scott to slavery. Although the Missouri high court had previously found in favor of slaves who had lived in free territory, ideas were hardening across the South, and the court concluded that Missouri law governed the case even though Scott had been in federally controlled free territory for years. Scott’s lawyers appealed to the federal courts, and when the district court in Missouri decided against Scott, his lawyers appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court where the case was heard in 1856.
The Supreme Court also decided against Scott. The justices could have based their ruling on fairly narrow grounds. Instead, the majority used the case to make a larger legal point. Considerable (though behind the scenes) pressure was apparently brought to bear on the justices. Chief Justice Roger Taney, however, did not need pressure to speak his mind. On March 6, 1857, he spoke for a majority of the court. In a long and complex decision, Taney made two key points. First, as a black man (presumably even a free black man), Taney said that Scott had no rights that the United States needed to honor. Based on his reading of the Constitution, Taney said that black people “had no rights which a white man was bound to respect.” When two dissenting justices noted that blacks had actually been voters in five of the states that had ratified the Constitution in 1789, Taney countered that they might, indeed, “have all the rights and privileges of the citizen of a State,” but that they were “not entitled to the rights and privileges of a citizen in any other state.” This opinion seemed to directly contradict Article IV, Section 2, of the Constitution, which said, “The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states,” but Taney ignored the clause and previous case law.
Second, Taney broadened the ruling. Scott had no standing to bring the case, the Chief Justice said, and even if he did have standing, he did not have a case. Fort Snelling was not actually free territory because the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional. Congress did not have the right to bar slavery in any federal territories. Depriving slave owners of their slaves, he said, violated the Fifth Amendment that said no one could be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law, and slaves were the private property of their owners. He did not say anything about the lives or liberties of enslaved people. But he did say that Congress “could not authorize a territorial government to exercise” any power to prohibit slavery.
>8 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
The Court not only returned Scott to slavery but also ruled that Congress could not prohibit slavery in any federal territory under any circumstances. Abolitionists soon purchased Scott and set him and his wife free. But the decision seemed to lock millions of their fellow African-Americans either in slavery or in second-class status even if they were free.
The outcome thrilled Southern leaders. The proslavery Constitutionalist in Augusta, Georgia, editorialized that “Southern opinion upon the subject of Slavery... is now the supreme law of the land.” At the same time, many Northern Democrats were also delighted, seeing the decision as “the funeral sermon” of the new Republican Party. Many moderate Northerners, however, were outraged. William Cullen Bryant, editor of the New York Evening Post, wrote that Taney’s decision was a “willful perversion” of the Constitution. Republican leaders, especially Seward of New York and Lincoln of Illinois, attacked the decision as the result of a secret negotiation between the Chief Justice and President-elect James Buchanan. Lincoln also said that if the Taney policy stood, then the advocates of slavery would soon make it “lawful in all the States...North as well as South” He promised that, if a Republican were elected president in 1860, he would find a way to undo the decision. The lines between the pro- and antislavery camps were hardening, not only in Congress but also in the country as a whole.
B
Quick Review Why was the Dred Scott case a significant turning point in public opinion— North and South—in the years leading up to the Civil War? 133
THE ECONOMY, THE PANIC OF
AND THE LINCOLN-DOUGLAS DEBATES________________________________________________________________
Explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide. Historians have long debated the degree to which economic issues, rather than arguments over slavery, caused the Civil War. The disagreements are nearly always ones of emphasis, but most agree that both issues—economic factors in the nation and debates over the morality of slavery—were factors.
The growth of the cotton economy between 1815 and 1860 tied the nation together, creating common interests among Southern slave-owning producers of cotton, Northern mill owners, and owners of ships that transported cotton to Britain. Abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts despaired of a country dominated by the “lords of the lash and the lords of the loom.
Other economic forces, however, were dividing the country. Ihe opening of the Erie Canal in 1825 created an east-west trade axis from New England through New York and into the Midwestern states of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois with connections through the Great Lakes to Michigan, Wisconsin, and even Minnesota. This trade network rivaled and then exceeded the trade down Mississippi River. In 1835, 95 percent of the trade in the Ohio Valley flowed south through New Orleans and only 5 percent through New York. But by 1850, more trade went from the Midwest to New York than to New Orleans. Midwesterners who before the mid-1830s saw their economic lives connected to the states that bordered the Mississippi were now much more connected to New York and New England and had little reason to care about the Southern states that had once been so important to them.
As the railroads were built, slowly in the 1820s and 1830s but much more rapidly in the 1840s and 1850s, they also followed the newer trade routes, linking the Midwest to the Northeast while other rail networks linked the interior of the South to Charleston and New Orleans. New settlement followed the trade
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 369
routes. More and more of the growing population of the upper Midwest came from New York and New England, the most antislavery regions of the country. In the 1850s, the new Republican Party reflected the interests of this fast-growing swath of the nation that stretched from New England into all of the Ohio River Valley and beyond to Indiana, Illinois, and Iowa. Most people in the region tended to be opposed to slavery, even if few were serious abolitionists. In addition, the Republican Party also spoke for their economic interests. John Sherman (brother of Civil War General William Tecumseh Sherman) began his political career as a Whig, but by 1854, he was elected to Congress as a Republican from an Ohio district on the shores of Lake Erie. Sherman said that while the Republican Party was born with “the immediate purpose and aim” of stopping the spread of slavery into the territories, it also supported an increase in the tariff to strengthen American industries; a homestead bill to encourage settlement of the new territories by people who wanted to build small family farms and who had no intention, or money, to bring slaves with them; land grant colleges that would serve agriculture and industry; and a transcontinental railroad that would link California to the East Coast. It was a good summary of what would become the Republicans’ economic program in the 1860s and 1870s, and it played well across the region.
However, neither that same economic program nor the Republicans’ opposition to the spread of slavery was seen as a benefit in the South, especially the Deep South. The pre-Civil War South was not an economic backwater. Indeed, it was the most prosperous part of the nation in the 1850s, but the prosperity could not be separated from cotton growing and slavery. As much as Southern cotton served as the raw material for New England mills, far more of it was shipped across the Atlantic to the larger mills in England. As much as the South was building railroads—often with slave labor—its rivers and extended coastline meant that water transport served the South better than the North. The Southern planter elite saw far less reason than most Northerners to support federal spending on canals
As the price of Midwestern wheat and goods produced in Pennsylvania and Ohio fell rapidly in 1857, panic hit the nation s financial center of New York's Wall Street. Newsboys sold extra editions of newspapers with
.	news brought by telegraph from around the country, and the papers were snapped up by fearful investors.
370 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
or a federal tariff that protected Northern industries. Southern-leaning presidents from Polk in the 1840s to Pierce in the 1850s vetoed bills for internal improvement that most Northerners, regardless of political party, badly wanted.
The Panic of 1857 exacerbated the economic split between the regions. It was much more severe in the North than in the South. Overproduction of Northern wheat helped precipitate the panic. When the Crimean War, which had pitted Britain and France against Russia, ended in 1856, European farmers resumed full-scale wheat production, and prices for American wheat fell sharply. But the English mills continued to need Southern cotton, and the price of cotton held steady. Moreover, in the iron- and coal-producing areas of the country, Pennsylvania and Ohio, demand for steel fell, people lost their jobs, banks failed, and panic ensued. Not surprisingly the Republican platform of 1860 supported a tariff both to provide revenue for the government and to protect Northern industry. The platform solidified support for the Republicans, especially in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. It also showed how deeply these states were cut off from the interests of the South where the tariff raised the cost of manufactured goods but did nothing to keep the price of cotton high.
Panic of 1857
A banking crisis that caused a credit crunch in the North; it was less severe in the South, where high cotton prices spurred a quick recovery.
S
The Lincoln-Douglas Debates Define the Political Parties
On June 16, 1858, Abraham Lincoln spoke to the Republican State Convention in Springfield, Illinois, that had just nominated him as their candidate against Stephen A. Douglas for the U.S. Senate. Reflecting on the Fugitive Slave Act, the Kansas-Nebraska crisis, and the Dred Scott decision, Lincoln quoted the Bible—well known to all of the convention delegates—and told them: “A house divided against itself cannot stand.” He continued:
I believe this government cannot endure, permanently half slave and half/ree.
I do not expect the Union to be dissolved—I do not expect the house to fall— but I do expect it will cease to be divided.
It will become all one thing, or all the other.
Either the opponents of slavery, will arrest the further spread of it, and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction; or its advocates will push it forward, till it should become alike lawful in all the States, old as well as new—North as well as South.
With all that had happened since 1850, Lincoln could see no other option. He begged his fellow Republicans to be sure the outcome was what they wanted. “Ihe result is not doubtful,” he concluded. “We shall not fail—if we stand firm, we shall not fail.” Some of the delegates who had just nominated Lincoln thought the speech was too radical and would hurt Lincoln in the fall elections but by 1858 he was prepared to stand firm on his ideas.
Later that summer, on August 21, 1858, Democratic Senator Stephan A. Douglas met Lincoln in Ottawa, Illinois, for the first of seven debates they held across Illinois in that election season. Douglas and Lincoln were campaigning to be elected by the Illinois legislature to represent the state in the U.S. Senate. They were also seeking to define the philosophy of their respective political parties. Hundreds attended their debates, and newspapers in every part of the country took their words to thousands of Americans. The debates were long and closely argued. Each sometimes spoke for 2 hours at a time. Ihe speeches and the responses were not sound bites, but carefully reasoned arguments that forced each leader to refine his views and the audience to follow them closely.
At the Ottawa debate, Douglas spoke first. He painted Lincoln and the Republican Party (Black Republicans Douglas called them) as allies of the most radical abolitionists. He attacked Lincoln’s “a house divided against itself’ speech. “Why can it not exist divided into Free and Slave States?” Douglas asked. “Washington, Jefferson, Franklin, Madison, Hamilton, Jay, and the great men of that day, made this government divided into Free States and Slave States, and left each State perfectly free to do as it pleased on the subject of slavery.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 371
In the 1850s, Frederick Douglass, who had grown up in slavery, became one of the nation's best known abolitionist speakers. Even many who disagreed with, or were frightened by, his words admired his public speakving ability and his capacity to win many to the abolitionist cause.
13.3
Douglas also criticized Lincoln’s attack on the Dred Scott decision. Douglas said that he agreed with the decision and told his audience that Lincoln’s approach would fill Illinois with blacks who would “become citizens and voters, on an equality with yourselves.” He warned that Lincoln was trying to “array all the Northern States in one body against the South, to excite a sectional war between the Free States and the Slave States.” He and the Democrats, Douglas said, were the party of unity while Lincoln and the Republicans promised only civil war. In response, Lincoln declared that he was no abolitionist and that he had “no prejudice against Southern people.” He also said that he would not himself know how to quickly abolish slavery where it already existed and, indeed, would honor all of the South’s “constitutional rights,” to protect slavery. He would even support the Fugitive Slave Act if it “should not, in its stringency, be more likely to carry a free man into slavery.” But the issue for him, Lincoln said, was the spread of slavery in the territories. Lincoln said that he had no interest in “perfect social and political equality with the negro.” Douglas’s efforts to say that he did were a “fantastic arrangement of words, by which a man can prove a horse-chestnut to be a chestnut horse.” Lincoln also attacked Douglas’s belief in “popular sovereignty”: “When he invites any people, willing to have slavery, to establish it, he is blowing out the moral lights around us.”
The Republicans lost the campaign for the legislature, and therefore Lincoln lost the senatorial election of 1858 to Douglas. But the 1858 debates helped shape the core philosophies of the nation’s political parties. They also put in the spotlight two political rivals who would meet again in 1860.
Quick Review How did the various expressions about slavery—written, spoken, and acted—deepen the already profound split in the Union?
FROM JOHN BROWN TO THE SECESSION OF THE SOUTH
13.4
Analyze the political impact of John Brown's raid and why Lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and the southern states then voted to leave.
Mason-Dixon Line
A line surveyed by Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon between 1763 and 1767 that settled the border between the then colonies of Pennsylvania and Maryland.
The year 1859 was an off year in American electoral politics. Regardless, in August, not far north of the Mason-Dixon Line that divided Pennsylvania from Maryland and thus free states from slave states, people in the small town of Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, suddenly turned their attention to the issue of slavery and abolition. One of the nations best-known abolitionists, Frederick Douglass, who had escaped from slavery on a Maryland plantation when he was a young adult and began his abolitionist career with William Lloyd Garrison, gave a speech in the Franklin County town. Both the town’s Democratic and Republican newspapers gave Douglass high marks as a speaker even though both said they disagreed with his views. But the speech was a cover for the real reason for Douglass being there. He had been summoned for a secret meeting with his old friend John Brown, who was a fugitive for his role in the violence in Kansas and who was living in Chambersburg under the name of Dr. Isaac Smith.
John Brown at Harper's Ferry
Douglass knew that Brown harbored dreams of sparking a slave uprising across the South. Until he met with him that August day in 1859, however, he had no idea how close Brown was to implementing his ideas. Years later, Douglass recounted their meeting while the two went fishing at an old quarry: “The taking of Harper’s Ferry, of which
72
PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
American Voices
Lydia Maria Child and Governor Henry A. Wise, Letters Regarding John Brown, 1859
* O/:
i
t/U^hen she heard of John Brown's raid and trial, Lydia Maria WW Child, a well-known Massachusetts abolitionist, defender of women's rights and the rights of American Indians, who was also a popular children's author, deplored the violence of Brown's effort but offered to go to Virginia to support him while he recovered from his wounds and awaited execution. Virginia Governor Henry A. Wise, known as a moderate, responded, offering Child protection in Virginia but also making it clear he held her and her fellow abolitionists guilty of inspiring Brown's violence. Their correspondence was published in Garrison's Liberator.
Wayland, Mass., Oct. 26th, 1859.
Governor Wise! ...Enclosed is a letter to Capt. John Brown. Will you have the kindness, after reading it yourself, to transmit it to the prisoner?
I and all my large circle of abolition acquaintances were taken by surprise when news came of Capt. Brown's recent attempt; nor do I know of a single person who would have approved of it had they been apprised of his intention. But I and thousands of others feel a natural impulse of sympathy for the brave and suffering man. Perhaps God, who sees the inmost of our souls, perceives some such sentiment in your heart also. He needs a mother or sister to dress his wounds, and speak soothingly to him. Will you allow me to perform that mission of humanity?...
I have been for years an uncompromising abolitionist, and I should scorn to deny it or apologize for it as much as John Brown himself would do. Believing in peace principles, I deeply regret the step that the old veteran has taken.... But... I will also say that if I believed our religion justified men in fighting for freedom, I should consider the enslaved everywhere as best entitled to that right. Such an avowal is a simple, frank expression of my sense of natural justice.
Yours, respectfully, L. MARIA CHILD.
Richmond, Va., Oct. 29th, 1859.
Madam: ...I will forward the letter for John Brown, a prisoner under our laws...for the crimes of murder, robbery and treason, which you ask me to transmit to him....
You ask me, further, to allow you to perform the mission "of mother or sister, to dress his wounds and speak soothingly to him." By this, of course, you mean to be allowed to visit him
in his cell, and to minister to him in the offices of humanity.	p-———
Why should you not be so allowed, Madam? Virginia and j Massachusetts are involved in no civil war, and the Constitution j
"which unites them in one confederacy" guarantees to you privi-	......
leges and immunities of a citizen of the United States in the State of Virginia. That Constitution I am sworn to support, and am, therefore, bound to protect your privileges and immunities as a citizen of Massachusetts coming into Virginia for any lawful and peaceful purpose.
Coming, as you propose, to minister to the captive in prison, you will be met, doubtless, by all our people, not only in a chivalrous, but in a Christian spirit...your mission being merciful and humane, will not only be allowed, but respected, if not welcomed....
I could not permit an insult even to a woman in her walk of charity among us, though it be to one who whetted knives of butchery for our mothers, sisters, daughters and babes. We have no sympathy with your sentiments of sympathy with Brown....His attempt was a natural consequence of your sympathy, and the errors of that sympathy ought to make you doubt its virtue from the defect on his conduct. But it is not of this I should speak. When you arrive at Charlestown, if you go there, it will be for the Court and its officers, the Commonwealth's attorney, sheriff and jailer, to say whether you may see and wait on the prisoner. But, whether you are thus permitted or not, (and you will be, if my advice can prevail,) you may rest assured that he will be humanely, lawfully and mercifully dealt by us in prison and on trial.
Respectfully, HENRY A. WISE
13.4
Source: Anti-Slavery Tracts, No. 1. New Series (Boston: American Anti-Slavery Society, 1860).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How would you describe the tone of the two letters? What might explain the authors' strenuous efforts to demonstrate respect for one another?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light do these letters shed on regional tensions in the years before the Civil War? What values and beliefs do the authors appear to share? On what points are they divided?
Captain Brown had merely hinted before was now declared as his settled purpose.” Douglass thought Browns idea was crazy, would result in immediate defeat, and as “an attack upon the Federal government.. .would array the whole country against us.” Brown was not persuaded. Douglass left Chambersburg dejected and fearful, perhaps doubly so because the former slave Shields Green who had accompanied Douglass to the meeting had decided to stay with Brown. As he told Douglass, “I b’leve I’ll go wid de ole man.”
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 373
13.1
13 3 I
All that summer, Brown had been planning for his raid. In the fall, he moved from Chambersburg to a farmhouse in Maryland not far from Harper’s Ferry, where a lightly guarded federal arsenal stood at the junction of the Potomac and Shenandoah rivers. Brown and his army of 16 white and five black men began their attack on the evening of October 16, 1859. They were confident that the slaves of the region would rise up to join them. As they entered Harper’s Ferry, they cut telegraph lines and took hostages, but they were also quickly attacked. They were encircled by angry townspeople, and within hours, federal troops under the command of Robert E. Lee arrived in Harper’s Ferry. When Brown refused to surrender, the troops attacked, killing or capturing most of the rebels. Only a few escaped. Brown was wounded. He and the other captured fighters were tried on charges of insurrection and treason against the state of Virginia. The jury took less than an hour to find them all guilty, and they were sentenced to hang on December 2, 1859.
Brown used the 6 weeks between his arrest and execution effectively. His calm words and actions after the raid, much more than the raid itself, made him a hero in much of the North and a frightening figure in the South. At his trial, Brown told the court:
Now, if it is deemed necessary that I should forfeit my life for the furtherance of the ends of justice, and mingle my blood further with the blood of my children and with the blood of millions in this slave country whose rights are disregarded by wicked, cruel, and unjust enactments, I say, let it be done.
While in prison, Brown also managed to conduct interviews and write letters that were widely circulated. He told a reporter from the New York Herald, “You may dispose of me very easily...but this question is still to be settled—this negro question I mean— the end of that is not yet.”
This famous painting of John Brown on his way to the gallows, stopping to kiss a slave child, shows Brown as the hero to the antislavery cause, which is the way that many in the North were beginning to see him.
mansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
374 Part
Immediately after the October raid, virtually everyone—Democrats, Republicans, even many abolitionists—condemned Brown as an insane fanatic. Soon, however, public opinion started to shift. In the North, Brown’s words and actions began to galvanize a wide spectrum of public opinion. People who initially dismissed him as insane started, much to their own surprise, to be swayed by his condemnation of slavery and—even more surprising to themselves—to consider his claim that violence might be needed to end it.
Henry David Thoreau’s “Plea for Captain John Brown” argued that Brown’s violence could not be compared with the violence of slavery. The pacifist William Lloyd Garrison criticized the raid but came to view it as “a desperate self-sacrifice for the purpose of giving an earthquake shock to the slave system.” Many Northerners concluded that Brown was a hero.
Northern sympathy for Brown sent a chill through the white South. With the emergence of the telegraph and faster printing presses, news traveled fast. Many Southerners became convinced that most Northerners were in league with radical abolitionists like Brown and with those slaves who harbored thoughts of revolt. Many in the South started to think that abolitionists really did want to promote a slave uprising. In response, much of the South quickly became an armed camp, and doubts about remaining in the Union began to grow.
The Election of 1860
The Republican Party that nominated Lincoln for the Senate in 1858 was still very new on a fast-changing political landscape. The first election that the new Republican Party contested had been in 1854 and resulted in a Republican Speaker of the House of Representatives. The Republicans, it seemed, were the party of the future. In contrast, the Democrat and the Whig parties had struggled with opposing members that included antislavery Northerners and proslavery Southerners. The Kansas situation had split both parties and was the death knell of the Whigs. They never again nominated a candidate for president.
By the 1856 presidential elections, the nation had three political parties, two of them new. The Democrats managed to continue as an uneasy coalition. The Republicans consolidated their strength in the North but were virtually nonexistent in the South.
A third party, the American Party, more commonly known as the Know Nothing Party, gained strength as anti-immigrant hysteria swept the country. The Democrats nominated James Buchanan from Pennsylvania whose prime strength seemed to be an exceeding vagueness about slavery and who had been seeking the presidency since serving as Polk’s secretary of state in the 1840s. The Republicans nominated war hero and adventurer John C. Fremont. And the Know-Nothings nominated former president Millard Fillmore. Fillmore carried only Maryland where anti-immigrant feelings were especially strong, while Fremont carried most of the most Northern states and Buchanan carried the South, including the more moderate parts of the South, plus Illinois, Indiana, and California, winning easily. If Buchanan entered the White House with any mandate in 1857, it was to avoid the issue of slavery. It was one the new president could not possibly fulfill, try though he did.
After 1856, the Know Nothing Party faded rapidly. Opposition to immigration did not have staying power as a political issue, especially when new immigrants provided the swing votes in key states like New York. Most Know-Nothings became Republicans in an uneasy alliance with the proimmigrant faction of the party. Republicans were also divided on just how far to go in embracing the abolitionists among them. As late as June 1859, Lincoln had begged Ohio Senator Salmon P. Chase to be sure that the Ohio Republican Party’s demand for “a repeal of the atrocious Fugitive Slave Law” not become an issue in the national Republican convention because “it will explode it.” But after 1857, it was the Democrats turn to divide as it became impossible for Northern moderates like Douglas and Southern extremists like Jefferson Davis to stay in the same political organization. Everyone
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 375
knew that the elections of 1860 were going to involve tough political contests. No one knew they would lead to war.
While the Lincoln-Douglas debates of 1858 established Abraham Lincoln as a national political leader, it was by no means certain that he would be the Republican nominee for president in 1860. Lincoln himself had mixed feelings about a presidential nomination since he had hopes of a career in the U.S. Senate. The frontrunner for nomination was New York Senator William Henry Seward, a former Whig and a founder of the Republican Party. But Seward also had many enemies, people who thought he was too radical or who just did not trust him. Many, including Lincoln, thought that if Seward did not get the nomination on the first ballot, his support would melt away. Two other prominent Republicans were also in the field—Governor Salmon Chase of Ohio, one of the party’s staunchest opponents of slavery, and Judge Edward Bates of Missouri, the candidate of the more moderate Republicans. And then there was Lincoln, respected by everyone, an extraordinary speaker, and more moderate than either Seward or Chase.
Lincoln’s convention manager, Judge David Davis, reported to Lincoln, “We are laboring to make you the second choice of all the Delegations we can, where we can’t make you first choice.” The strategy worked. While Seward took the lead on the first ballot, Lincoln—not Chase or Bates—came in second. By the third ballot, it was all over as delegates made Lincoln’s nomination unanimous. Of course, being the nominee of a new political party did not guarantee victory. Seward, Chase, and Bates all campaigned hard for Lincoln, and after the election, he appointed all three to his Cabinet as secretaries of state and treasury as well as attorney general. But in between the nomination and the victorious election, there was a hard-fought presidential campaign.
Given the tensions in the country in the summer of 1860, it is not surprising that traditional political parties splintered. A faction of the old Whig Party reemerged as the Constitutional Union Party. It nominated slaveholder John Bell of Tennessee for president and Edward Everett of Massachusetts for vice president on a vague platform of “the Constitution, the Union, and the Enforcement of the Laws” (presumably a reference to the Fugitive Slave Act). Some saw this small party as the best hope to hold the country together through new compromises. Others ridiculed them as the “Old Gentlemen’s Party,” since most of those who campaigned for Bell were well past age 60.
The Democrats, who had elected the last two presidents, met in Charleston, South Carolina, in April 1860. They were deeply divided. Stephen A. Douglas was the frontrunner for the nomination, but although Douglas had once been popular in the South, after his opposition to admitting Kansas as a slave state, most Southern political leaders now considered him to be a traitor to their cause. Mississippi Senator Jefferson Davis insisted on a platform that pledged the party to protect “the constitutional right of any citizen of the United States to take his slave property into the common territories. But Douglas’s supporters could not stomach abandoning their candidate’s long-held commitment to “popular sovereignty” and would not support a platform that opened all the territories to slavery regardless of what the voters said. After 57 ballots, the convention could not agree on any nominee and adjourned to meet again in Baltimore in 6 weeks to try again.
When the Democrats convened again in Baltimore, however, the same splits were evident. One-third of the delegates—nearly all of the Southerners and a few proslavery Northerners—walked out of the convention. The remaining Democrats nominated Douglas and adopted a popular sovereignty platform. The delegates who had walked out of the convention organized their own convention and nominated John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky, who was Buchanan’s vice president, adopting the platform advocated by Jefferson Davis. Southern Democrats understood that the split in the party would benefit the Republicans, but they were so angry with Douglas that they were willing to accept that result. Some also believed that a Republican victory would build support for their real goal, which was secession. A Democratic Party leader and former congressman, William Lowndes Yancey, told a crowd in Charleston that it was time for “a new revolution,” and “an Independent Southern Republic.”
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
This political cartoon published during the 1860 presidential election depicts Lincoln and Douglas, on the left, fighting over much of the country while, in the center, Breckinridge tries to tear off the South and, on the right, Bell, with glue pot in hand, tries to put the whole thing back together.
13.1
132
132
13.4
The Republican ticket did not even appear on ballots in most of the South, and Republican candidates would have risked their lives campaigning in the region. Lincoln campaigned against Douglas in the North. Breckinridge campaigned against Bell in the South. No one had ever seen a presidential election quite like it. Despite the crazy split, the North, with its larger population, was going to settle the election. Douglas had a chance to win the election if he and the Northern Democrats could carry enough Northern states and some of the slave states known as “border states” where Northern influence was strongest and the attachment to slavery was weakest (see Map 13-2). Douglas claimed to be the only candidate who could unite the nation. He continued to paint Lincoln as a radical and tried to frighten Northern voters by saying that Lincoln would bring blacks into the North as the social equals of whites who would also compete with whites for jobs.
The Republicans had a lot going for them. They were new. They attracted young, first-time voters. They were united. Their economic policies appealed to many in the North. Even so, some abolitionists did not trust the Republicans. William Lloyd Garrison said that “the Republican party means to do nothing, can do nothing, for the abolition of slavery in the slave states.” Frederick Douglass, perhaps more of a realist, countered, saying that a Republican victory must and will be hailed as an anti-slavery triumph.”
On Election Day in November 1860, the breadth of the Republican victory was dear. Breckenridge carried most of the South. Bell won Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee. Although Douglas received far more votes than either Breckenridge Or Bell, he carried only Missouri and half the electoral votes of New Jersey. Lincoln received only 40 percent of the national popular vote, but it was the most of any single candidate, and his 180 electoral votes were a solid majority. As cheering crowds his hometown of Springfield, Illinois, celebrated, Abraham Lincoln, who had served one term in Congress and had never held an executive position, became the President-elect of the United States. What his election would mean for him and for country only time would tell. Few thought it would lead to a long and bloody war.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 377
\'
UT4HTERR,T0l
KY
UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY
NEBRASKA ,TERRITORY
NEW MEXICO TERRITORY/
MINNESOTA
j x .......... f
KANSAS TERRITORY
INDIAN TERRITORY
Lincoln, Republican Douglas, Democratic (Northern) Breckinridge, Democratic (Southern) Bell, Constitutional Union
NEW HAMPSHIRE
(5) VERMONT ,
MASSACHUSETTS \ V MAINE (13) \ \ ,\ (8)
WISCONSIN	( RHODE
,SLAND > x (4)
IOWA
(4)
(5) MICHIGAN ) (8)
•4HO.J
T§)
ARK-
(UNORGANIZED, (4)
TEXAS
(4)
IND. OHIO
(11) ,O3V ^23 r '• ' X"1-VIRGINIA KY
TtNN(«)
MISS ALA-
\ (7) W
LOUISIANA
(8)
GA
(10)
CONNECTICUT (6)
NEW JERSEY
(4) DELAWARE (3)
MARYLAND
NORTH CAROLINA
(») SOUTH
CAROLINA
(6)
FLORIDA
(3)





/
MAP 13-2 The Election of 1860. This map, indicating the electoral vote of each state, illustrates the regional nature of the final vote in the 1860 presidential election. Lincoln carried all of the North as well as California and Oregon. Breckinridge, the southern Democrat, carried all of the Deep South and beyond. Bell, the candidate who called for glossing over all the differences, carried the key border states of Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee that Douglas had been counting on. In the end, Douglas carried only the slave state of Missouri and split the electoral votes of New Jersey with Lincoln.
As Alexander McClure, a prominent Pennsylvania attorney, wrote 40 years after the Civil War, “The North believed that the South was more bombastic than earnest in the threat of provoking civil war for the protection of slavery, and the South believed that Northern people were mere money-getters, ready to yield anything rather than accept fratricidal conflict.”
The Secession of the South
As some had predicted, Lincoln s election provided Southern secessionists with just the rationale they needed. Many Southerners, including moderates, were furious about Lincolns election. They saw the breadth of Northern support for a committed free-soil candidate as one more effort to exclude slavery from the territories. They also saw it as part of a larger pattern that included Northern failure to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act and Northern support for John Brown. The Charleston Courier editorialized that Lincolns election meant it was time for “a Southern Confederacy,” something “desired by all true hearted Southerners.”
The night after the election, a huge crowd of demonstrators in Charleston demanded action, and the South Carolina legislature called a special convention to consider secession. On December 20, 1860, the convention voted 169-0 in favor of dissolving “the union now subsisting between South Carolina and other states.” Other states in the Deep South followed. In January 1861, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, and Louisiana all voted to leave the Union, followed by Texas
378 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
on February 1. None of the other states after South Carolina were unanimous in their votes, but over 80 percent of the delegates in each of these states voted for secession, which was probably a fairly accurate reflection of the opinions of the white male population. Nevertheless, a minority in most Southern states, even in the Deep South, preferred to wait and see what Lincoln would actually do, but as Louisiana Senator Judah P. Benjamin wrote, the “prudent and conservative men” of the South were not able “to stem the wild torrent of passion which is carrying everything before it.”
The reality was, however, that the demands of these “prudent and conservative men” of the South were for things to which Lincoln would not agree. When Kentucky Senator John Crittenden proposed the Crittenden Compromise to preserve the Union by extending the Missouri Compromise line to the Pacific and thus protect slavery in the New Mexico Territory and California, Lincoln refused to consider the compromise even though his close ally William Seward urged him to do so. As he had made clear in his various campaigns, he did not intend to abolish slavery where it existed, but he did not want to spread slavery any further. Lincoln had also come to believe that any effort at appeasement would do nothing to control slavery but would simply open the door for continuing demands. The pressing question in February and March of 1861 was about the slave states that had not yet voted to secede, the so-called border states that were closer to the North, less militant in their defense of slavery, and perhaps most likely to stay with the Union: Maryland, Arkansas, North Carolina, Delaware, Missouri and, most of all, the strategically placed states of Kentucky, Tennessee, and Virginia—the largest and most industrialized state in the South. Lincoln did not want to lose them, at least not all of them.
In the face of the secession crisis, the wait from November 1860 to the presidential inauguration in March 1861 seemed especially long. The outgoing Buchanan administration, never decisive, seemed more unsure of itself than ever. Rumors of a Southern invasion or an internal coup filled the capital. Many senators joined Seward and Crittenden in seeking a compromise that would avoid secession or war. Others in and out of Congress proposed all sorts of solutions, including even abolishing the office of president. The senators and representatives of the seven states that had voted to secede by February 1 packed their belongings, gave their farewell speeches, and left town to organize the government of the Confederate States of America—a project they accomplished with amazing speed at a 6-day convention in Montgomery, Alabama, where they drafted a temporary constitution and selected a provisional president and vice president. In the meantime, the rest of the country seemed frozen.
Although the states of the Deep South voted to leave the Union, conventions in Virginia, Arkansas, and Missouri did not vote on secession. North Carolina and Tennessee did not even hold conventions. But leaders in all of these states warned that any violence by the federal government against those states that had voted to leave the Union would force them to depart also. Some in the North seemed happy to see part of the South depart. The Chicago Tribune said that if South Carolina wanted to leave, “let her go, and like a limb lopped from a healthy trunk wilt and rot where she falls.” In New York, Horace Greeley’s Tribune said, “If the Cotton States shall become satisfied that they can do better out of the Union than in it, we insist on letting them go. However, secession angered others in the North.
One resident of Illinois wrote to Congress saying, We elected Lincoln, and are just as willing, if necessity requires, to fight for him. A resident of Ohio wrote that Lincoln “must enforce the laws of the U.S. states against all rebellion, no matter what the consequences.” Even Senator Sewards wife criticized her husbands efforts at compromise, telling him, “Compromise based on the idea that the preservation of the Union is more important than the liberty of nearly 4,000,000 human beings cannot be right.” While it is likely that many Northern white voters would have been willing to preserve the Union at the cost of 4 million people remaining in slavery, a good
Crittenden Compromise
A last-ditch effort at a compromise to amend the Constitution to protect slavery in states where it existed.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 379
13.4
portion of Northerners—though far from all—seemed to be ready to fight rather than let the Union be dissolved. In that tense and uncertain situation, after months of waiting, Lincoln made his way from Springfield to Washington.
Abraham Lincoln was inaugurated as the 16th president of the United States on March 4, 1861. His inaugural address broke little new ground. He said that he considered secession illegal and that he would assert federal authority, especially over forts and other federal installations in the South. He insisted that he had no interest in interfering with slavery in the states where it existed. And he promised to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act while also asserting that he wanted stronger protection against free people being kidnapped in the name of enforcing the law. In closing, he made a poetic plea that the Union must be preserved:
We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battle-field, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.
Northern response to the speech was mixed. Garrison’s Liberator noted that Lincoln’s insistence that free blacks needed protection from the Fugitive Slave Act represented the first time any president had spoken of citizenship rights for blacks—a direct contradiction of the Dred Scott decision. Other abolitionists were disappointed. Many moderates agreed with the Jersey City newspaper that said, “it was hardly possible for Mr. Lincoln to speak with more mildness.”
Confederate leaders did not see the speech as mild. Lincoln’s refusal to recognize the right of secession and his claim on the federal property in the South seemed to them to be a prelude to war. Two days after the speech, the Confederate Congress authorized a call for 100,000 troops. Lincoln did not respond by making any similar call of his own. One of his advisors, Orville H. Browning, had written to the president that it was “very important that the traitors shall be the aggressors.... [T]hen the government will stand justified, before the entire country, in repelling that aggression.” That policy was exactly the one Lincoln planned to follow.
Conflict seemed most likely to begin at Fort Sumter, a new federal installation guarding the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina. Sitting within view of the city where secession had begun, Fort Sumter was a dramatic symbol of federal authority in the heart of the Confederacy. The 80-man garrison was commanded by Major Robert Anderson, a former slaveholder from Kentucky, whose decades in the army had made him a devoted supporter of federal authority. Soon after their vote to secede from the Union in December 1860, South Carolina authorities demanded that outgoing President Buchanan remove the federal garrison and hand the fort over to them. In an uncharacteristic show of strength, Buchanan refused and tried to reinforce the fort in January 1861. South Carolina fired on the supply ship—but not the fort—and the ship turned back. By the time Lincoln came to office in March, Anderson was running low on supplies and knew he would have to either surrender or evacuate soon.
On April 6, after some hesitation, the new president announced that he was sending a supply ship with food and medicine, but not arms, to Fort Sumter. Jefferson Davis was not willing to allow the federal presence in what Davis now considered an independent country and ordered Pierre G. T. Beauregard, the officer in charge of Confederate troops in Charleston, to attack the fort. On April 12, 1861, at 4:30 a.m.> shore batteries in Charleston began to shell Fort Sumter and continued to do so for the next day and a half. On April 13, out of food and ammunition, Major Anderson surrendered. Anderson and the defending troops were allowed to leave, and they sailed to New York where they were greeted as heroes, but the Confederates had control of the fort. The Confederates had won the battle, but they had fired on the American flag and started a war.
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
This popular illustration of the firing on Fort Sumter adds drama to the scene. Confederate guns did fire on the fort almost nonstop on April 12 and 13, and the fort's defenders, with very little ammunition, fired back on occasion before finally, out of food and ammunition, they surrendered on April 13.
President Lincoln declared that a state of insurrection existed and called on the state governors for 75,000 volunteers while also ordering the expansion of the regular army and navy and recalling some troops from the West. Ihe attack and Lincoln’s response brought unity—even if temporary—to most of the North. Stephen A. Douglas, though seriously ill, came to the White House to promise his support and then returned to Illinois to tell Democrats and Republicans that they owed undivided loyalty to the Union.
As the president focused on preserving the Union, some African-Americans and their supporters called the looming war “a White Man’s war.” Lincoln had made it clear, they said, that the fighting was to “save the union” not necessarily to free the enslaved. Nevertheless, some abolitionists saw an opportunity. Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts reminded Lincoln that “under the war power the right had come to him to emancipate the slaves.” Ihe black-owned Weekly Anglo-African told readers that the slaves “have a clear and decided idea of what they want—Liberty.” It would take time before the president or Northern public opinion would agree, but some supported the goal of emancipation from the first days of the war, especially slaves who followed the news closely.
Lincoln’s call for federal troops united the South. Tennessee’s governor announced that his state “will not furnish a single man for the purpose of coercion, but fifty thousand if necessary for the defense of our rights and those of our Southern brothers.” Within days of the firing on Fort Sumter and Lincoln’s call for hoops, every border state had begun to consider secession and four—Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas—voted to join the Confederacy. Ihe 88 to 55 vote to secede in Virginia was far from South Carolina’s unanimity, and the western counties of Virginia later declared their loyalty to the Union. Representatives from that area took Virginia’s seats in Congress until West Virginia could be organized as a separate state in 1863.
Missouri had its own civil war that started with mob violence in St. Louis where most German immigrants favored the Union cause while recent arrivals from the South supported the Confederacy. Ihe Confederate government admitted Missouri as its 12th state, but Union loyalists also organized their own state government. Two opposing Missouri state governments sent representatives to both Washington and Richmond while lawlessness reigned in most of the state throughout the war.
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 381
13 2
132
132
13.4
Kentucky declared neutrality. Since there was probably more proslavery and pro-Confederacy sentiment in Kentucky than in any other slave state that remained in the Union, Lincoln courted the state carefully. If Kentucky seceded, the border between the United States and the Confederacy would be the Ohio River, dangerously far north. If Kentucky stayed in the Union, then Lincoln and his generals would have much easier access to multiple points of attack on the heartland of the Confederacy. Given its strategic importance, Lincoln was reported to have said that “he hoped to have God on his side, but he must have Kentucky.” He got Kentucky. Ihe state did not secede, and sentiment for preserving the Union was strong in that state, though Kentucky sent soldiers to both sides. Perhaps more than anywhere else, the Civil War in Kentucky was a war of brother against brother. Four of Henry Clay s grandsons fought for the Confederacy and three for the Union.
Ihe other two border states also remained loyal to the Union: Delaware’s northerly location and the few slaves there made the decision almost inevitable. Maryland’s loyalty to the Union was assured by the influx of federal troops and Lincoln’s arrest of some pro-Confederacy members of the state legislature. If Maryland had joined the Confederacy, Washington would have been cut off from the rest of the country, and Lincoln was not going to let that happen. Thus Maryland, Delaware, and Kentucky remained as slave states within the Union throughout the duration of the war while Virginia and Missouri were represented in both the Union and Confederate congresses. After Union victories in Louisiana and Arkansas, those states were also represented in the U.S. Congress by one set of people while others represented them in the Confederate Congress.
Despite Lincoln’s success in retaining some of the border states, the loss of others, especially Virginia, was a severe blow to the Union. Over half of all those who fought in the Confederate Army came from border states, including several of the South’s most prominent generals. On the day Virginia voted to secede, Robert E. Lee was offered command of the Union army but responded, “I cannot raise my hand against my birthplace, my home, my children.” Lee resigned from the U.S. Army and eventually commanded the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia. Almost as important, Virginia included the Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond, the only factory in the South capable of making heavy shells and armor, and the federal arsenal at Harper’s Ferry and the Gosport Navy Yard. All of these facilities were in Confederate hands by the end of April.
Even after the attack on Fort Sumter and the secession of the border states, many doubted that a real war would take place. People in the North were confident that the South would come to its senses, perhaps after an easy Union conquest of Richmond, Virginia. People in the South were confident that the North was not really up for a fight, certainly not a fight to end slavery where it had existed for over 200 years and probably not a fight to save the Union either. Both sides were terribly wrong.
13.4
Quick Review How did Lincoln's election impact the thinking of people in the South and, therefore, the course of U.S. history?
CONCLUSION
Throughout the 1850s, divisions between the North and the slaveholding South intensified despite efforts of some politicians on both sides to keep growing tensions in check. The burning question that continually threatened to divide the nation-would slavery be permitted to expand into new territories and states—could not be amicably decided.
Attempts by Southerners to defend the institution of slavery, and to ensure that slavery could expand into new states in the West, were met by growing choruses of antislavery sentiment in the North. Once-moderate opponents of slavery hardened their positions against the South as the events of the decade unfolded. Abolitionism,
382 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
whose adherents saw slavery as an evil that had to be destroyed, continued to grow in force, and many in the North, regardless of their opinions about racial equality, simply did not want the future of the country to be defined by slave labor. Slave labor, if it were allowed to exceed the confines of the South, would undermine the value of the “free labor” ideology of the North.
California’s application for statehood endangered the balance of power in the Senate between the North and the South. In an effort to find a new middle ground, the Compromise of 1850, originally planned by the aging Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky, admitted California to the Union as a free state but gave Southerners several incentives for resisting secession, including a new, strengthened Fugitive Slave Act. But the Fugitive Slave Act infuriated many in the North, and Northern reluctance to enforce the law infuriated many in the South, even people who themselves did not hold slaves.
The Compromise of 1850 did not save the Union for long. Harriet Beecher Stowe’s 1852 novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin, written in response to her own anger about the Fugitive Slave Act, may have seemed to be a romanticized version of events to some, but it brought the reality of the pain of slavery home to many in the North. It quickly became a best seller and inflamed public opinion. When Congress passed the Kansas-Nebraska Act in 1854 in an effort to organize a government for the previously Unorganized Territory between Minnesota and Oregon, the legislation provided new opportunities for slavery to spread, even in regions north of the geographical divide between free and slave that had been established by the Missouri Compromise in 1820. The result was not only national tension but a civil war in Kansas so bloody that the territory came to be known as “Bleeding Kansas.” In 1857, the Supreme Court’s landmark decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford triggered further outrage in the North when it declared that the federal government had no authority to regulate the spread of slavery in any of the territories. In that same year, the Panic of 1857, which hit the North far more than the South, illustrated how distinct the two regions had become in their economies. Later, Southerners were outraged by Northern sympathy for the radical actions of John Brown when he attacked the federal arsenal at Harper s Ferry, Virginia (now in West Virginia but then part of the state of Virginia), in 1859. These events deepened sectional tensions and rivalries. As the nation responded, a new political party, the Republican Party, emerged, and an established political party, the Whigs, dissolved. At the same time, Abraham Lincoln gained national prominence as he campaigned first for a U.S. Senate seat and then for the presidency. With Lincoln’s election to the presidency in 1860, tensions came to a head: a majority of Southern states seceded from the Union and civil war, which many hoped and expected would be short, began.
C HI RE
What areas of conflict between North and South led to the Civil War? What do most historians consider to be the single most important cause of the war? Why?
Chapter 13 The Politics of Separation 383
Chapter 13 Chapter Review
13.1
FROM UNION TO DISUNION__________________________________
Analyze the political jockeying in Congress and how reaction to the Fugitive Slave Act and the publication of Uncle Tom's Cabin, changed the opinions of many Americans—South and the North—making a break between them hard to avoid.
Review Questions
1.	Historical Interpretation
What light does the debate over the admission of territories acquired by the United States at the conclusion of the War with Mexico shed on the root issues dividing the North and South in the decades before the Civil War?
2.	Crafting Arguments
How did passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act contribute to the rise of the Republican Party and the demise of the Whigs?
3.	Crafting Arguments
How did the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 affect public opinion about slavery in the North? How would you explain the impact of the law?
BLEEDING KANSAS AND DRED SCOTT V. SANDFORD
Analyze the causes and consequences of the battle over slavery in Kansas and the Supreme Court's decision in the Dred Scott case and the impact of those events on public opinion.
Review Questions
4.	Contextualization
Why did both pro- and antislavery forces believe that victory in Kansas was critical to their cause?
132
13.3
5.	Crafting Arguments
Why did the Supreme Court ruling in the Dred Scott case make a peaceful resolution of the conflict between the North and the South over slavery less likely?
THE ECONOMY, THE PANIC OF
AND THE LINCOLN-DOUGLAS DEBATES
Explain how the economic crisis of 1857 and the growing political crises of the decade impacted each other and led the nation to divide.
Review Question
6.	Contextualization
What light do the Lincoln-Douglas debates shed on Lincoln's views on slavery and race in 1858?
FROM JOHN BROWN TO THE SECESSION OF THE SOUTH
Analyze the political impact of John Brown's raid and why Lincoln won the presidential election of 1860 and southern states then vote to leave the Union?
Review Questions
7.	Historical Interpretation
How did John Brown’s 1859 raid on Harper’s Ferry help radicalize public opinion in both the North and the South?
8.	Crafting Arguments
Defend or refute the following statement: “After Lincoln’s election in November 1860, war between the North and the South was inevitable.”
13.4
384 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Demonstrate an understanding of the strategies involved in fighting a civil war and the impact of the war on American life—North and South.
1861-1865
North and South, men volunteered with enthusiasm to serve in their respective armies.These new Confederate soldiers, like their Northern counterparts, reflect a commitment that did not always last as the long years of fighting the war continued. Homer, Winslow (1836-1910.) Prisoners form the Front. 1866. Oil on canvas, 24x38 in. (61 x 96.5 cm). Gift of Mrs. Frank B,
Porter, 1922 (22.207). Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Image copyright ©The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Image source: Art Resource, NY
Once Fort Sumter had been fired on, large patriotic rallies were held North and South. Of course, what it meant to be patriotic varied depending on where one lived. Calls for volunteers by Confederate and Union authorities were quickly oversubscribed. Young men did not want to miss out on the fun and glory of what everyone thought would be a short war and an easy victory. A Confederate volunteer from Mississippi wrote home in June 1861 that he was ready “to fight the Yankees-all fun and frolic.” On the Union side a New York volunteer wrote “I and the rest of the boys are in fine spirits.. .feeling like larks.
Letters from new recruits also showed seriousness of purpose. A New
Jersey soldier wrote that he joined the army because Our glorious institutions are likely to be destroyed,” while a Midwestern recruit said that his service was “a duty I owe to my country and to my children to do what I can to preserve this government.” Sentiment among soldiers in the Confederacy was equally patriotic. Mississippi’s Lucius Lamar, who would achieve high rank in the Confederate army, said, “Thank God! We have a country at last to live for, to pray for, to fight for, and if necessary to die for.” An enlisted man in the Confederate army gave a simple answer when he was asked after his capture why he, a nonslaveholder, fought for the South, “I’m fighting because you’re down here.” Soldiers were sent off in new uniforms with cheering parades. The war did not long remain so lighthearted.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
FORT SUMTER TO ANTIETAM,
1861 -1862 Explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
THE ROAD TO EMANCIPATION
Analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities, leading to the Emancipation Proclamation and to black soldiers in the Union army.
THE HOME FRONT—SHORTAGES, OPPOSITION, RIOTS, AND BATTLES
Explain how the war's death toll and civilian shortages affected life—North and South—during the war.
FROM GETTYSBURG TO APPOMATTOX AND BEYOND
Analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
14.1
14J
14.3
14.4
