Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 27
This image of shows Columbus taking his leave from the King and Queen of Spain to journey across the Atlantic on the three ships in the background.
2.1
Significant Dates
1492	Columbus lands on an island in the Bahamas
1497	John Cabot explores the coast of North America for England
A
German mapmaker names the new continent "America" in honor of Amerigo Vespucci 1509	Juan Ponce de Leon founds San Juan, Puerto Rico
1513	Juan Ponce de Leon first explores Florida
1514-1566	Bartolome de Las Casas's 50-year campaign for the rights of the Indians
1517	Martin Luther begins Protestant Reformation
1519-1521	Hernan Cortes conquers the Aztec Empire in Mexico
1524	Giovanni da Verrazano explores the Atlantic coast of North America for France
1528-1536	Cabeza de Vaca travels from Florida to Texas to Mexico
1532	Francisco Pizarro conquers the Inca Empire
1534-1536	Jacques Cartier explores the St. Lawrence River
1534	Parliament names Henry VIII head of the Church of England
1540-1542	Coronado expedition to the Southwest
1539-1542	Hernando de Soto explores the Mississippi River Valley
1542-1543	Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo explores the coast of California
1565	St. Augustine, Florida, founded, oldest European city in what is now the United States
1579	Francis Drake sails along California coast
1587	Roanoke, Virginia, first English settlement in North America
1598	First Spanish settlement in New Mexico
not Asia, but an unknown continent filled with people they had never imagined existed. The Columbian encounter led to unimagined power and wealth for many Europeans. It also led to the creation of new ethnic groups as children were born to American Indian-European couples. And it shifted the balance of trade and commerce around the world from land to the world’s oceans.
For the American Indians, the encounter was even more of a surprise, and much more devastating. Suddenly, from across the ocean, unimagined people arrived, with a strange way of talking and dressing, a strange religion, and a different way of looking at the world. In part because of differences in technology, in part because of differences between European and indigenous people’s understandings of war and conquest, and most of all, because of differences in the two groups’ ability to withstand European diseases, the encounter led to conquest, disease, and death for many Indians.
Understanding what happened in the history of the United States over the next 500 years depends on understanding the differences between those who arrived from Europe—especially from Spain, France, and England—as well as from Africa and the diverse peoples who lived in the Americas when they arrived. With the arrival of Columbus and the many Europeans who followed him once news of his journey spread, something new in human history took place: a massive transit and mixing of peoples in North and South America.
COLUMBUS, THE COLUMBIAN EXCHANGE, AND EARLY CONQUESTS
2.1
Explain the reasons behind the voyages of Columbus and early Spanish encounters with the peoples of the Caribbean, Mexico, and South America.
As delighted as Columbus was by the Taino welcome and generosity and what seemed to him the easy opportunity to convert them to Christianity, Columbus also noted other things that would be more ominous for their future:
They do not carry arms nor are they acquainted with them, because I showed them swords and they took them by the edge and through ignorance cut themselves. They have no iron. Their javelins are shafts without iron and some of them have at the end a fish tooth.
Conquest, Columbus came to believe, would be easy.
28 Parti Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607

2.1
American Voices
The Dedication of Columbus’s Log to the King and Queen of Spain, 1493
2,2
eturning from his first voyage in early 1493, Columbus understood how much his exploration was linked to Ferdinand and Isabella's efforts to unify Spain into a militant, single-minded nation. He spelled out these links when he dedicated his report to the rulers.
Whereas, Most Christian and Very Noble and Very Excellent and Very Powerful Princes, King and Queen of the Spain's and of the Islands of the Sea, our Lords: This present year of 1492, after your Highnesses had brought to an end the war with the Moors who ruled in Europe and had concluded the war in the very great city of Granada, where this present year on the second day of the month of January I saw the Royal Standards of Your Highnesses placed by force of arms on the towers of the Alhambra...and Your Highnesses, as Catholic Christians and Princes, lovers and promoters of the Holy Christian Faith, and enemies of the false doctrine of Mahomet and of all idolatries and heresies, you thought of sending me, Christobal Colon, to the said regions of India to see the said princes and the peoples and the lands,
and the characteristics of the lands and of everything, and to see how their conversion to our Holy Faith might be undertaken.... So, after having expelled all the Jews from all of your Kingdoms and Dominions, in the same month of January Your Highnesses commanded me to go, with a suitable fleet, to the said regions of India.
Source: Oliver Dunn and James E. Kelley, Jr., translators, The Diario of Christopher Columbus's First Voyage to America, 1492-1493, abstracted by Fray Bartolome de Las Casas (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1988), pp. 17-19.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What connection did Columbus make between Spain's defeat of Muslim Granada, the expulsion of the Jews from Spain, and his own voyage across the Atlantic?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What does the document suggest about the role of religion in motivating Spain's efforts at overseas exploration and expansion?

23
23
23
I
i
Columbus described what would be the terms of much of the European contact with American Indians: “They should be good and intelligent servants, for I see that they say very quickly everything that is said to them.” Columbus also looked closely at the ornaments and jewelry that some of the Indians were wearing and wrote, “I was attentive and labored to find out if there was any gold.” The search for gold, and the effort to subjugate the Indians in its service, had begun.
The Four Voyages of Christopher Columbus
In spite of the friendly welcome he received, Columbus took some Tainos as captives.
He wanted to teach them Spanish and show them to his sponsors in Spain. Columbus
also wanted guides to the gold he was sure could be found since he had seen some
Tainos wearing gold ornaments. Led by native guides, he sailed on to Cuba and sent a
party inland to find the local chief (or cacique as the Taino called their leaders) who
his guides said had access to gold. When Columbus did not find the leader or the gold,
he sailed to another island he named Hispaniola (modern Haiti and the Dominican
Republic). He built a fort and left part of his crew there with instructions to search for
gold. In January 1493, Columbus, with six Taino prisoners, turned back to Spain.
Columbus never fully understood the importance of his voyage. He set out to discover a route across the Atlantic directly to Asia, and he thought he had indeed reached an unknown part of Asia, perhaps Japan or Korea. Thinking the people he met looked like those who came from the part of south Asia Europeans called the Indies,” he called them Indians. Of course, he did not really discover a new land because the Indians were already there. Columbus certainly discovered a new route across the Atlantic, but it led to a continent filled with people unknown to Europeans.
The rest of Columbus’s life was a tragedy, for himself and for the peoples he had encountered. To impress the Spanish court, Columbus exaggerated what he had
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 29
2.1
23
23
2.4
2.5
found, especially the gold. Isabella and Ferdinand gave him seventeen ships and 1,200 men for a second voyage to seek slaves and gold in this supposed part of Asia, just as the Portuguese were finding both in Africa.
When he arrived back on Hispaniola in 1494, Columbus found that the native residents had killed the sailors he had left behind in 1492. A local chief initially offered protection to the Europeans, but when the sailors sought to make the Tainos slaves, they rebelled. Columbus ordered retribution, and many Tainos were killed. As word spread of the harsh ways of the Europeans, the Indians became less friendly, and Columbus found himself “discovering” deserted villages. The Caribbean had little gold despite Columbus’s desperate efforts to force the natives to find it, and many Tainos died from Spanish swords or from forced labor that the Spanish instituted.
Columbus himself was a better explorer than administrator and less vicious than many of his successors (see Map 2-1). During his third voyage to the Caribbean in 1498, he tried to set up a government on Hispaniola. But many Spaniards complained about hard lives there with little reward. A new governor sent Columbus back to Spain in chains. Although the Spanish monarchs forgave him and allowed him a fourth voyage in 1502, he never governed again.
Amerigo Vespucci Inspires a Continent's Name
Columbus was not the first European to reach the Americas. Archeologists have discovered evidence of a short-lived Norse settlement called LAnse aux Meadows on Newfoundland somewhere between 900 and 1000, but the settlement was quickly forgotten on both sides of the Atlantic. If others crossed the Atlantic, or the Pacific, their voyages were also soon forgotten. What was different about the voyage of Columbus was that so much of Europe took interest and so many Europeans followed in his wake.
In the earliest exploration and conquest of the Americas, Spain was the unquestioned leader. Portugal focused primarily on its rich trade routes around Africa and
iecona voyage
Third voyage (1498-1500), inset only Fourth voyage (1502-1504)
NORTH
AMERICA
Columbus de 3 total of four voyages starting and ending in the Spanish port city of Palos and enabling him to see and describe the islands of Bahamas where he first landed Hisoani (modem Dominican Repul* and Haiffl, Cuba, Jamaica, and much c.he co, a, 3	to *
30 Parti Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
2,1
into the Indian Ocean. However, Portuguese explorers also quickly followed routes across the Atlantic similar to those of Columbus, exploring, and claiming much of South America. In 1494, Spain and Portugal agreed to the Treaty of Tordesillas in which a line drawn by the pope separated Spanish and Portuguese claims in South America. To this day, Brazil, east of the line, is a Portuguese speaking country while the rest of South America is Spanish speaking.
In April 1495, only two years after Columbus returned from his first voyage, Isabella and Ferdinand authorized other Spanish voyages across the Atlantic. A young Italian merchant, Amerigo Vespucci, made three or four trips—the historical record is not clear between 1497 and 1504, some authorized by Spain, others by Portugal. Sailing along the coast of Brazil, much farther south than Columbus ever ventured, Vespucci concluded that the land mass on the other side of the Atlantic was much larger than the first reports indicated. Unlike Columbus, Vespucci was convinced that Europeans had reached a new continent, rather than Asia. As a result, a German publisher, Martin Waldseemuller, produced a new map of the world in 1507. He called the new continent that Vespucci described America in his honor.
Treaty of Tordesillas
Treaty confirmed by the pope in 1494 to resolve the claims of Spain and Portugal in the Americas.
America
The name given to the lands Europeans encountered across the Atlantic after 1492, in honor of the explorer Amerigo Vespucci.
22
23
24
23
The Impact of European Arms and Disease
The Spanish governors who came after Columbus were more efficient and more cruel. As they learned more about the lands and peoples that Columbus had claimed for them, Ferdinand and Isabella pressed harder for gold. They also ordered that the Indians be treated well and not enslaved. But Spanish governors focused on the gold and ignored the command to show kindness. Nicolas de Ovando who became governor on Hispaniola in 1502 set a pattern. He brought 2,500 Spanish settlers—families, not just male explorers—to build a permanent settlement. In the future, many Spanish explorers also married native women, creating new families of mixed ethnic heritage. Ovando attacked the Tainos ruthlessly. In 1502, he responded to a rebellion in Higuey by capturing 600-700 Indians and then ordering them all to be knifed to death and their bodies displayed. Later, in 1503, he convened an ostensibly friendly meeting of the caciques, the district chiefs, and when some 80 of them had assembled in one building, he ordered the doors locked and the building burned with them in it. With that act, the last independent chiefdoms of Hispaniola were ended.
However, the most devastating thing that Columbus and his successors did was unintentional. They brought European diseases. The Tainos, like all natives of the Americas, had no immunity to smallpox, measles, or other diseases they had never known. In Europe where these diseases were common and had been for hundreds of years, many people had developed immunity to them or at least to their worst effects. American Indians had no such immunity. As a result, while Indians died by the hundreds from Spanish swords, they died by the thousands from disease. There were probably 1 million people on Hispaniola when Columbus landed in 1492. By the early 1500s, only 1,000 Tainos were left. Within a century, all were gone. The European destruction of the first people of the Americas had begun.
From a total population of perhaps 70-80 million (no one really knows) when Columbus arrived, native peoples in both the Americas dropped to 4.5 million as a result of war and disease in the decades after the first encounter. However unintentional the introduction of European disease was, the staggering numbers of Indian deaths made their conquest easy, and many Europeans were happy to take advantage of their already cleared land. For the Indians, tragedy followed tragedy.
Soon, on the islands where Columbus first landed, the only Indian descendants were people of mixed races. A Spanish census of 1514 indicated that 40 percent of the Spanish men had native wives. The arrival of African slaves in the 1500s added African blood to the mix. Today, many of the peoples of the Americas are descendants of all three of the groups that met in the Columbian encounter.
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 31

European diseases, especially smallpox, killed more of the original inhabitants of the Americas than any other cause. This illustration, originally done by Aztec scribes before their conquest, described "a great sickness" that came with sores "so terrible that the victims could not lie face down, nor on their backs, nor move from one side to the other."
The Making of an Ocean World—The Atlantic and Columbian Exchange
Silk Road
The overland trading route first established by the Venetian trader Marco Polo in the late 1200s.
News of the new contact with the Americas changed the way many people looked at the world. Most educated Europeans already believed that the world was round and not flat. But until 1492, they were concerned primarily with the land. Traders had long gone over land on the Silk Road established between Venice and China by Marco Polo between 1271 and 1295 that brought luxury goods to Europe from Asia. Portuguese sailors stayed close to the coast of Africa as they sailed around that continent to Asia. Norse sailors had explored the far North Atlantic—hopping from Iceland to Greenland, and on to the nearest parts of North America—seeking new fishing opportunities. But Columbus and his successors did something different; they sailed directly across the ocean, with no landmarks to guide their journey. Soon after that journey, the oceans—the Atlantic, the Indian, and very soon the Pacific—became the primary trade routes for Europeans, Americans, and increasing numbers of unwilling Africans. Nations that had ports on the Atlantic, especially Spain, Portugal, and England, moved from the margins of a land-focused Europe to become the key points of contact with an ocean-focused world. Ihe shift from primarily land-based, or near-shore sea trade, to trade spanning the world’s oceans was a revolution in the way people thought, and it had winners and losers.	I
The trade and cultural exchanges across the interconnected continents of Europe, j Asia, and Africa and did not end after 1492, but the relationships were different. Portugal and Spain replaced Genoa and Venice as the primary European links to Asia. Portuguese and Spanish ships dominated the Indian Ocean. Many other Spanish explorers followed Columbus in very short order. In addition to those who explored the Atlantic i coast, Vasco Nunez de Balboa reached the Isthmus of Panama in 1513 and became the first European to view the Pacific. In 1519, five ships and their crews commanded by Ferdinand Magellan began a journey that led them around the tip of South America in 1520 and across the Pacific to the Philippines, where Magellan himself was killed. Three years after they had departed, a handful of the explorers, on one ship, became the first
Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
people to circumnavigate the globe, arriving back in Spain in 1522. Spanish galleons not only brought silver mined in the Americas across the Atlantic to Spain but soon also brought silver across the Pacific to Manila in the Philippines. (Manila itself was founded by Spanish traders in 1571.) The world of the 1500s was becoming an oceanic world including the Atlantic, the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific. The Atlantic Ocean that had been the great barrier on the western edge of Europe suddenly became the great highway connecting known and previously unknown continents. Portugal and Spain were the first European states to establish trading routes across the oceans, but during the 1500s, England, France, and Holland also assumed major roles in the new trade.
As Europeans came to terms with the Americas, the people of the Americas also had to come to terms with Europe. For each there were gains and losses. What became known as the Columbian Exchange—the interchange of diseases, plants, animals, and human cultures between New and Old Worlds after 1492—reflected some of these changes. The most tragic loss occurred with the transmission of disease-bearing microbes that devastated populations in the Americas. New populations began to emerge after 1492, when the peoples who met in the Americas produced offspring that carried the biological traits and the cultures of their ancestors from vastly different parts of the world.
The exchange also changed the eating habits of almost every person on the planet. In Europe, Asia, and Africa, foods such as corn, beans, peanuts, potatoes, cassava,
Columbian Exchange
The transatlantic exchange of plants, animals, and diseases that occurred after the first European contact with the Americas.
TABLE 2-1 The Columbian Exchange
	From the Americas to Europe, Africa, arid Asia	From Europe, Africa, and Asia to the Americas	From the Americas to Europe, Africa, and Asia		From Europe, Africa, and Asia to the Americas
Plants	Corn (maize)	|	Wheat	Animals	Turkeys	Chickens
	Potatoes	Barley		Llamas	Donkeys
i i	Sweet potatoes	Rye			Cattle
	Peanuts	Oats			Goats
	Pumpkins	Apples			Horses
	Pineapples	Peaches			Pigs
	Guava	Pears			Sheep
	Squash	Plums			Cats
	Tomatoes	Apricots			
	Peppers	Cherries	Disease	Syphilis (Syphilis was also	Smallpox (the single most deadly disease among
	Papayas	Bananas			American Indians)
				known in the ancient	
	Avocados	Coffee		Eurasian world and has	Measles
	Beans	Tea		been found in Egyptian mummies but a new	Influenza
	Cassava	Sugarcane Melons		and virulent form of the disease was brought	Yellow fever
	Blueberries			to Europe from the	Typhus
	Tobacco	Lemons		Americas.)	Scarlet fever
	Cocoa	Oranges			Diphtheria
	Vanilla	Cabbage Carrots			(Sometimes multiple diseases from this list
					affected an American
		Grapes			Indian community at the same time.)
		Lettuce			
		Onions			
		Garlic			
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 33
23
24
2 '5
New Spain
The name of Spain's first empire in the Americas.
sweet potatoes, avocados, pineapples, tomatoes, chilies, vanilla, and cocoa from the Americas enriched people’s diets. Rice, wheat, barley, oats and many new fruits and vegetables from Europe, Africa, and Asia fed the American Indians as did chickens, cattle, sheep, and pigs (see Table 2-1). Horses changed the way many American Indians lived. A world without this variety is unimaginable today.
The Conquest of the Aztec and Inca Empires
Besides European diseases, the peoples of the Americas faced another threat: armed conquest. Hernan Cortes sailed from Cuba to Mexico with 600 soldiers in 1519. Within 2 years, he conquered Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, and renamed it Mexico City. When he first arrived, some of the Aztecs may have thought Cortes might be their lost god Quetzalcoatl, who was said to have vanished from the place where Cortes landed. In their initial encounter, the Aztec Emperor Motecuhzoma (often written as Montezuma) welcomed Cortes. They exchanged gifts, which Cortes saw as a sign of submission to Spain. The relationship soured quickly. Cortes took the emperor prisoner but allowed him to maintain a facade of rule.
In July 1520, the Aztecs turned on Cortes, and he and his soldiers fled the capital. But they did not go far. With support from thousands of non-Aztec tribes—people who hated Aztec dominance and who hated having their people being used for the human sacrifices that Aztec religion demanded—the Spanish army regrouped and began a long, bloody siege of Tenochtitlan. Motecuhzoma himself was killed, probably by his own people, and Cortes completed his conquest of the city in August 1521.
With Tenochtitlan destroyed, Cortes set about building a new and grander city on the same spot. On the site of the main Aztec temple, he ordered the building of a massive new Catholic cathedral modeled on the one at Granada, which had recently been built in the former Muslim stronghold in southern Spain. In both cases, the religious architecture symbolized the defeat of the “infidels.” Within a generation, a thriving new Mexico City, filled with great churches and government palaces, had become the home of the Spanish viceroy—the king’s representative—and the capital of New Spain, as the Spanish called their empire in Mexico and Central America.
One of the earliest images of Hernan Cortes, on horseback, fighting with Aztec warriors.
Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
In 1532, in Peru, Francisco Pizarro and his army of 168 Spanish soldiers defeated the Inca Emperor Atahuallpa and his army of 80,000 soldiers. Within a few years, the Inca Empire of 32 million people, much larger than the Aztec Empire, had become the Viceroyalty of Peru, a second major outpost of distant Spain. Its primary purpose was to supply gold and silver to finance Spains European ambitions. At Potosi in Bolivia, 45,000 slaves at first Indians then also Africans—worked the mines that created the wealth that made King Charles V and his son Philip II the richest and most powerful rulers in Europe.
The swiftness of the Spanish conquest of the Aztec and Inca Empires was possible for many reasons. Aztec resistance was undermined by a sense of fatalism fueled by early visions of their own defeat. Many non-Aztecs joined with Cortes, more than happy to be rid of the Aztecs. The Incas could not imagine, and therefore did not fear, Pizarro’s initial surprise attack since he claimed to come in the name of friendship. Pizarro’s dishonesty in announcing that he was coming in friendship followed by his surprise attack was simply inconceivable to people reared in the long history of Inca civilization. And both empires found Spanish horses, swords, and armor terrifying. The ruthless military skill of Cortes and Pizarro and the Spanish mastery of guns, steel swords, and horses created an enemy who was simply unimaginable to Aztec and Inca armies and therefore very difficult to resist. The Aztecs and the Incas could not match the Spanish strategies and tools of war.
Perhaps the most significant Spanish advantage was smallpox. The Aztecs may have lost half of their population to smallpox during the 2 years of attack by Cortes on their capital, and the Incas faced the same terrifying losses. An Inca emperor had died from smallpox shortly before Pizarro arrived. The disease traveled at a far faster pace than even Spanish armies could march and often preceded them. For people used to living in harmony with nature, the terrible ravishing of the disease that occurred along with the arrival of these frightening white-skinned, bearded, and horse-mounted soldiers tore apart their world—militarily, culturally, and spiritually—all in a very short time.
2.1
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Pizarro and Atahuallpa
In his popular book, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fate of Human Societies, Jared Diamond traces the unequal competition between different groups of humans from the beginning of recorded history to the present. His core question is why people of European origin came to dominate the planet despite the many advances Asians, Africans, and the peoples of the Americas made. In one chapter, he focuses on the early encounter of Europeans and Americans describing, "why the Inca Emperor Atahuallpa did not capture King Charles I of Spain. The analysis focuses on the development of ideas, technology, and disease before 1492 that allowed Atahuallpa and some 80,000 followers to be defeated by just 168 Spaniards led by Pizarro. This kind of questioning is an important part of accurately understanding historical events.
Thinking Critically
1.	Chronological Reasoning
What ideas in Inca society prior to 1492 contributed to their defeat? What developments in European society contributed to Spanish victory?
2.	Crafting an Argument
In trying to explain the rapid European conquest of the Americas, how much emphasis would you place on advanced technology? What about disease? How about cultural differences? Since the Inca Empire was much larger than that of Spain in the 1530s, why did Atahuallpa not consider sailing across the Atlantic to conquer Spain?
Source: Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (New York, W. W. Norton, 1997,2005).
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 35
This statue of Bartolome de Las Casas stands in a prominent place in modern Mexico City as recognition of the respect in which he is held by many of the indigenous people of Mexico and the Americas.
encomienda
In the Spanish colonies, the grant to a Spanish settler of a certain number of American Indian subjects, who would pay him tribute in goods and labor.
conquistadores
The name given to the early Spanish conquerors of Mexico and Peru.
Bartolome de Las Casas and the Voices of Protest
Spain’s treatment of the American Indians did not occur without protest. On Hispaniola, it was denounced within less than 20 years. In 1511, on a Sunday before Christmas, Antonio de Montesinos, a Dominican priest, asked his Spanish congregation, “Tell me, by what right do you keep these Indians in cruel servitude?.. .You are in mortal sin for the cruelty and tyranny you deal out to these innocent people.”
Bartolome de Las Casas (1484-1566) may have heard Montesinos’s sermon. Certainly he had heard of it. Las Casas edited the log of Columbus’s journey and moved to Hispaniola to make his own fortune in 1502. Although he became a priest in 1510, he participated in the conquest of Cuba in 1512 and was rewarded with a large ranch, or encomienda, worked by Indian slaves. But his conscience bothered him. In 1514, he gave up the land and the slaves and began preaching and writing against the oppression of the Indians, which he continued to do for the next 50 years. Las Casas documented in detail the cruelty of the Spanish conquerors, begging the Spanish crown to stop the conquistadores, the soldiers who were creating the Spanish Empire in the Americas.
Las Casas also left an important record of the life and customs of the first peoples of the Americas. He wrote that among them, “marriage laws are nonexistent: men and women alike choose their mates and leave them as they please, without offense, jealousy, or anger.” They live, he wrote, in
large communal bell-shaped buildings, housing up to 600 people at one time... made of very strong wood and roofed with palm leaves... .They prize bird feathers of various colors, beads made offish bones, and green and white stones with which they adorn their ears and lips, but they put no value on gold and other precious things....They are extremely generous with their possessions and by the same token covet the possessions of their friends and expect the same degree of liberality.
If they worshipped at all, it was not in a form that this Catholic priest recognized.
Nevertheless, the key purpose of all of Las Casas’s writings was to ask the Spanish authorities to intervene to protect the Indians. He described seeing native people worked
Although he never left Europe, Theodore de Bry (1528—1598) spent many years drawing illustrations of European-Indian encounters based on first-hand reports, including this one showing the attack by Spanish soldiers on an Indian village.
36 Part I Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
to death in the mines when moderate labor’ turned into labor fit only for iron men: mountains are stripped from top to bottom and bottom to top a thousand times; they dig, split rocks, move stones and carry dirt on their backs to wash it in rivers, while those who wash gold stay in the water all the time with their backs bent so constantly it breaks them.”
Las Casas always believed, or at least hoped, that if the Spanish monarchs only knew the truth, Spain s rulers would intercede. At times, the distant monarchs seemed to heed him. Shortly before her death, Isabella ordered that the Indians must be treated as freemen and not as slaves, they must be given wages, they must be treated well [Christians should receive better treatment than non-Christians].” Las Casas was determined to show just how far reality departed from these orders.
While Las Casas may have led the Spanish authorities to make a few reforms, the biggest effect of his work was not what he expected. He was writing during the Protestant Reformation, and Protestants, far more than Catholics, republished his words, creating what came to be known as the “Black Legend” (for the color of the priests robes) of unique Spanish cruelty. History would show that the Spanish were not unique in their treatment of American Indians, but the legend of their special cruelty persisted even as other Europeans adopted the same techniques and attitudes.
2.1
Quick Review Which factor do you believe was most responsible for the destruction of native populations? Justify your answer with evidence from the chapter.
American Voices
Bartolome de Las Casas, The History of the Indies, 1550
Tr he publication of The History of the Indies, along with the many speeches and other writings from priests like Las Casas had multiple results. Las Casas clearly documented for all time just how cruel the first Europeans were in their treatment of the indigenous people of the Americas. On a few occasions, it led Spanish authorities to end some abuses or replace vicious officials, but such steps were rare and seldom had lasting effect. In the hands of enemies of Catholic Spain, the documents were used to create a long-lasting story of unique Spanish cruelty. Ultimately, the careful documentation created one of the best reports—even if a romanticized one—on the experience of American Indians at the time of their first encounter with Europeans. The following is an excerpt from Las Casas's History:
The men were sent out to the mines as far as 80 leagues away while their wives remained to work the soil, not with hoes or plowshares drawn by oxen, but with their own sweat and sharpened poles that were far from equaling the equipment used for similar work in Castile. They had to make silo-like heaps for cassava plants, by digging 12 square feet 4 palms deep and 10,000 or 12,000 of such hills—a giant's work—next to one another had to be made, and they had other tasks of the same magnitude of whatever nature the Spaniards saw as fittest to make more money. Thus husbands and wives were together only once every 8 or 10 months, and when they met they were so exhausted and depressed on both sides that they had no mind for marital communication and in this way they ceased to procreate. As for the
newly born, they died early because their mothers, overworked and famished, had no milk to nurse them, and for this reason, while I was in Cuba, 7,000 children died in 3 months. Some mothers even drowned their babies from sheer desperation, while others caused themselves to abort with certain herbs that produced stillborn children. In this way husbands died in the mines, wives died at work, and children died from lack of milk, while others had not time or energy for procreation, and in a short time this land, which was so great, so powerful and fertile, though so unfortunate, was depopulated. If this concatenation of events had occurred all over the world, the human race would have been wiped out in no time.
Source: Bartolome de Las Casas, History of the Indies. 1550.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What kinds of abuses did Las Casas identify? What motives did he imply were behind Spanish brutality?
2.	Contextualization
Who might Las Casas have been hoping to influence by publicizing Spanish abuses in the New World? What allies might he have found for his cause within Spanish society? How might the Protestant focus on his work have unintended consequences for Las Casas?

Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 37
Martin Luther's challenge to Catholic teachings and practices in his day led to a decisive split in the unity among Christians that had been known in western Europe for centuries. Soon thereafter, John Calvin also challenged some of Luther's teachings leading to a three way split between Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvinists—followed by further splits among Protestants.
A DIVIDED EUROPE: THE IMPACT OF THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION
22
Explain how the Protestant Reformation and the development of the nation-state changed
Europe and European ideas about how best to settle and govern America.
Ninety-Five Theses
A document with 95 debating points that a young monk, Martin Luther, hoped would lead to a series of reforms within the Catholic Church.
Protestant Reformation
The process that began with Martin Luther's efforts to reform the Catholic Church's practices in the early 1500s and that eventually led followers of Luther, Calvin, and others to completely break from the Catholic Church.
nation-state
A relatively new development in Europe during the 1300s and 1400s in which nations became the major political organizations, replacing both the smaller kingdoms and city-states.
When Columbus sailed in 1492, he did so with a commission from the rulers of a newly unified Spain. Spanish explorers and conquerors brought the same quest for unity to the Americas. They sought to convert all native peoples to Catholic Christianity as part of the expansion of Spains realm. In 1492, few Western Europeans would disagree with that mission. Soon, however, Europe’s religious unity would disappear.
Less than 30 years after Columbus made his voyage across the Atlantic, the Protestant Reformation changed the way Europeans thought about the world, whether they became Protestant or remained Catholic. The initial European encounter with the Americas was led by representatives of a religiously united Europe. But nearly all of the subsequent exploration and settlement of North America was conducted by Europeans who represented particular groups from a continent deeply divided by religious hostility. That divide shaped the way they understood their efforts on both sides of the Atlantic.
The Birth of Protestantism
In 1517, before Hernan Cortes began his conquest of Mexico, a young German monk, Martin Luther (1483-1546), asked for a debate about religious doctrine by posting his Ninety-Five Theses on the door of a church in Wittenberg in the small independent German-speaking state of Saxony. At this time, some within the Roman Catholic Church began to challenge some of the church’s practices, prompted partly by new translations of the Bible and by new attention to the writings of Saint Augustine, a theologian of the early church. The challenges questioned the Catholic Church’s insistence that bishops and not everyday Christians should interpret the Bible and the idea that one could reach salvation through “good works.” In particular, the challenge that Luther posted questioned the Catholic practice of using indulgences that granted forgiveness to sinners to raise money. His action quickly led to a religious split, first in Germany, and then across Europe. That split, known as the Protestant Reformation, would shape the cultural and political development of the future United States.
As word of Luther’s protests spread, many Germans, including significant members of the nobility who controlled many of the small independent states of Germany, were drawn to the Lutheran cause. In the century that followed, other Protestants developed their own religious ideas, including followers of the French-Swiss reformer, John Calvin (1509-1564), who were known as Calvinists, while other Protestants went in other directions.
Part of what fueled the extraordinary response to Luther’s challenge was the cumulating effect that the technology of printing had produced during the previous 62 years. Johannes Gutenberg’s creation of a printing press that used moveable type in 1455 and the subsequent rapid spread of printing hugely expanded literacy beyond a small educated elite, mostly clergy, who had monopolized literacy in the medieval world. By 1500, at least 10 million individual books had been printed, and many people learned to read; thus, new ideas could spread with a rapidity not known before. Sermons and pamphlets by Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvinists circulated rapidly. The printing press prompted a free flow of ideas that most people in Europe had not experienced before. Religion and the Nation-State
The idea of the nation-state developed more or less at the same time as the Protestant-Catholic split. The modern idea that the world should be governed by independent nations, or nation-states, was new in the Europe of the 1500s. Indeed, a world divided into separate independent nations clashed with a long-standing ideal, held by many, of a unified Europe— unified in religion and government. In reality, the Europe of the 1400s was not united at
,	>9^ Part I Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607

1
UNITED
SCANDINAVIA
SCOTLAND
North Sea UNITED IRELAND NETHERLANDS
ENGLAND \ Amsterdam 5 <s
a
Bristol
Dublin
Plymouth
GERMAN AND OTHER
,	,	STATES
London (Holy Roman Empire)
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Normandy
Paris
SWlTZ.
Genoa*
Pisa*
Vienna
eVer?ice
.Florence
Aragon
Lisbon
Palos*
Madrid
Castile
SPAIN
^[editerranee^
GRANADA
n • ITALIAN Rome sTATES

MAP 2-2 Europe on the Eve of the Columbian Encounter. In the years before Columbus made his 1492 voyage across the Atlantic, western Europe was being divided into nation states including England, France, and Spain. Central Europe remained a series of separate states loosely united in the Holy Roman Empire.
all. Real power rested in very local territories. Frederick, Elector (or Duke) of Saxony, was Luthers protector and had enough power to ensure Luthers safety in spite of hostility from the Holy Roman emperor, the pope, and the kings of nearby France. But most of Europe’s modern nations did not exist. Even within the church, distance and the difficulty of travel gave local Catholic bishops great independence from papal authorities in Rome.
By the late 1400s, however, something new was emerging in European views of the best forms of government. Ferdinand and Isabella united Spain by 1492. Kings in France, Sweden, Scotland, and England had done the same earlier in the 1400s. The idea of being part of a nation was taking on new importance (see Map 2-2).
Virtually no one argued in favor of religious freedom for the citizens of these nations. Instead, different religious parties, Catholics and assorted Protestants— Lutherans, Calvinists, and others—sought to impose their religious beliefs on as many others as possible. Each party argued that it was defending truth and saw no reason to tolerate those they believed were defending error. This belief in the absolute rightness of one’s cause led to more than a century of bloody persecution and religious wars from Ireland and Scotland to France, Germany, and Hungary. The Peace of Augsburg in 1555 that addressed divisions between Lutherans and Catholics and the Treaty of Westphalia that concluded the Thirty Years’ War between Catholics and Protestants in Central Europe in 1648 each provided that, in each nation covered by the treaty, the ruler would decide the faith of the people and that foreign armies would no longer intervene in the religious affairs of another state. It was a long way from religious freedom, but it brought an end to the worst religious bloodshed while linking national unity and religious uniformity more tightly together than ever.
The Protestant Reformation and the divisions that followed had a huge impact on European settlement in the Americas. Different nations from a divided Europe battled with each other for control of those new lands. In addition, the wars and divisions in Europe led many to seek asylum in a new place, preferably as far away from the old as possible.
Peace of Augsburg in 1555
An agreement among different smaller kingdoms in Germany that no ruler would attack the kingdom of another on religious grounds.
Treaty of Westphalia
A 1648 peace treaty between a number of European powers that significantly extended the ideas of the Peace of Augsburg.
Quick Review Why might religious changes inspire people in Europe to look outward to the rest of the world? How would the link of religious and national unity in Spain and other parts of Europe affect the behavior of Europeans when they conquered other people?
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 39
EXPLORATION AND ENCOUNTER IN NORTH AMERICA: THE SPANISH
23
kntiyLQ early Spanish exploration of America north of Mexico.
23
Conquests of the Aztec and Inca Empires produced extraordinary wealth for Spain. Exploration further north in the Americas—in the future United States—was secondary for the conquistadores and much less lucrative for Spain. In spite of the wealth being generated from the empires in Mexico and Peru, for more than a century, most Europeans showed more interest in getting through or around North America and on to Asia than in exploring the lands north of New Spain. Nevertheless, the unknown lands north of Mexico beckoned to some Spaniards in the 1500s, even if they were not considered as exciting as Central and South America (see Map 2-3).
Ponce de Leon in Florida, 1513-1521
Juan Ponce de Leon, who had been part of the Spanish army that conquered Muslim Granada in 1492, led the first known European expeditions to Puerto Rico and Florida. In 1508-1509 he founded the first Spanish community near what would become San Juan and was named Governor of Puerto Rico. In 1513, he led an expedition from Puerto Rico that arrived in what he thought was another island, which he named La Florida. Legend says he was seeking a “Fountain of Youth” that would keep him forever young. Certainly he was seeking an expansion of Spains empire in the Americas and greater wealth for himself. Ponce de Leon was accompanied by free Africans whose families were slaves in Spain. Europeans, Africans, and the native peoples of the Americas first met on the soil of the future United States when Ponce de Leon landed.
In 1521, Ponce de Leon returned to Florida with some 200 followers—Europeans, Africans, and Indians from Puerto Rico. The Native Americans in Florida did not welcome them. Ponce de Leon was wounded by a poisoned arrow and died soon thereafter. But the first of many contacts between native peoples and travelers from Europe and Africa in what are now the 50 United States had been made in Florida.
Narvaez, 1528	—— Coronado, 1540-1542
Cabeza de Vaca	Drake, 1577-1580
and Esteban, 1528-1536
MAP 2-3 North American Exploration. In the first one hundred years after Columbus, European exploi trave,ed alon9 doth the Atlantlc and Pacific coasts and through much of the interior of what almost two hundred years later would become the United States. By 1592, however, most Europeans had concluded that there was no easy route through North America to Asia and little gold to be found so they lost intere in the regions north of Mexico.	7
artl Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
1
Exploring Texas by Accident: Cabeza de Vaca, 1528-1536
In 1528, there was another ill-fated effort to colonize Florida. Panfilo de Narvaez sailed to Tampa Bay with about 400 men—Europeans and a few Africans. The Narvaez expedition was a disaster. Leaving the ships in Tampa Bay, about 300 men spent months tramping through swamps seeking gold and, soon, merely food and water. Along the way, American Indians attacked them, shooting arrows that penetrated their heavy Spanish armor. The attackers quickly vanished into the forests and swamps while the surviving Spaniards tramped on wearing 50 to 60 pounds of heavy armor.
Finally, ill, under attack, and starving, the survivors decided to build new boats and leave. Years later, one of them remembered:
This seemed impossible to all, because we did not know how to build them, nor were there...one of all the things that are necessary, nor anyone who would know any way to apply ingenuity. And above all there was nothing to eat.
Nevertheless, they built five barges, and 250 men set out for what they hoped would be home. Instead, the currents, winds, and a hurricane took them west. Two or three of the five barges survived the storm and came ashore near what is now Galveston, Texas.
American Indians gave the survivors food, water, and shelter. Of the 80 explorers who survived the journey across the Gulf of Mexico, only 15 lived through the first winter on the Texas coast (see Map 2-2). The others died of cold and disease. Many of the American Indian hosts also died of European diseases that the Spanish brought with them, and the surviving Indians grew hostile to these intruders who had brought so much disease and trouble.
While others from the Narvaez expedition may have lived out their lives among the American Indians of the Texas coast, only four of them, three Spaniards—Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Andres Dorantes, Alonso del Castillo Maldonado—and an African Muslim slave from North Africa, named Esteban, decided to literally walk home to Mexico City. Thus, like Florida, Texas was explored by Europeans and Africans together, providing the Indians there with their first exposure to both. The foursome’s 8-year adventure took them through southern Texas, the northern states of Mexico, and eventually to the Pacific coast and on to Mexico City.
The four travelers found villages, developed a reputation as healers and traders, and collected a trove of information about American Indians who lived in permanent houses and had a good supply of corn and beans. Later Cabeza de Vaca described the ways of the people he met:
When Indian men get into an argument in their villages, they fist-fight until exhausted, then separate. Sometimes the women will go between and part them, but men never interfere. No matter what the disaffection, they do not resort to bows and arrows....
All these [plains] tribes are warlike, and have as much strategy for protection against enemies as if they had been reared in Italy in continual feuds... .Whoever fights them must show no fear and no desire for anything that is theirs....
I believe these people see and hear better and have keener sense in general than any in the world. They know great hunger, thirst, and cold, as if they were made for enduring these more than other men, by habit and nature.
Cabeza de Vaca also described “a big copper rattle that was given to them:
It had a face represented on it, and the natives prized it highly... .It had been brought from the north, where there was a lot of it, replied the natives, who considered copper very valuable. Wherever it came from, we concluded the place must have a foundry to have cast the copper in hollow form.
The American Indians refused to believe these men were of the same race as the Spaniards they had previously known. As Cabeza de Vaca wrote, the four explorers appeared to be distinct from earlier Spanish invaders because, we cured the sick and they killed those who were healthy, and that we came naked and barefoot and they
1
i
i
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 41
were clothed and on horseback and with lances, and. ..had no other purpose but to steal everything they found.”
When the four explorers finally reached Mexico City in 1536, their story inspired further exploration. Ihe expeditions that followed, however, did not heed the four explorers’ peaceful approach to interactions but were, instead, motivated by suggestions of astounding riches.
23
I
Seven Cities of Cibola
The name given by early Spanish explorers to a number of Native American pueblos.
Exploring the Southwest: Esteban, de Niza, and Coronado, 1539-1542
The four Texas explorers found great interest as they told their story in Mexico City. In their 8 years living with American Indians, the Spaniards heard stories of seven wealthy and powerful cities with buildings of four or five stories and copper, silver, and gold everywhere, upriver on the Rio Grande. For the Spaniards, stories of fabulous wealth were alluring.
A
Spanish legend seemed to further validate what the four Texas explorers shared. The legend told about seven Christian bishops who had fled from the Muslim invasion of Spain in the 700s and established seven wealthy cities far to the west. As the Spanish community in Mexico City heard the stories brought from Texas, many of them remembered both the wealth that Cortes had found and the ancient stories of the fleeing bishops. The Texas survivors showed the copper rattle they had been given, which added to the allure. Many in Mexico City now wanted to explore the territory to their north. In 1539, a Franciscan brother Marcos de Niza, led an expedition to find the fabled cities. De Niza asked Esteban, the African who had walked across Texas, to scout for them. Thus an African was the first non-Indian many of the Pueblo peoples met. Esteban knew that the Native Americans had never seen a black person. From his years in Texas, he also thought he knew what would impress them: he wore feathers, bells, and turquoise and took on aspects of a god. He sent messages back to de Niza indicating that he had come to wealthy towns. Esteban enjoyed his role until he came to the Zuni Pueblo of Hawikuh. The Zuni told Esteban to leave. When he threatened them, they killed him. De Niza came far enough north to see Hawikuh from a distance, but he did not want to risk Estebans fate. He returned to Mexico City and reported to the viceroy that the city “is better seated than any I have seen in these parts,” and he said “I was told that there is much gold there, and the natives make it into vessels and jewels for their ears, and into little blades with which they wipe away their sweat.” De Niza was careful not to claim more than he had seen. He had seen irrigated fields, buffalo hides, and—from a distance—populous towns, and he had only heard reports of gold and great wealth. Nevertheless, such a report was enough to launch further expeditions. De Niza had also heard a name for the region—Cibola. From then on, the search for the Seven Cities of Cibola became the stuff of legend.
In 1540, Francisco Vazquez de Coronado led a large expedition across what is now the U.S.-Mexican border into modern Arizona. At the Zuni pueblo of Hawikuh, in the confederation of Cibola, they had their first battle with the American Indians of the Southwest. The Zunis did not take kindly to the demand that they submit to previously unheard of Spanish authority. Coronado’s men had gone without adequate food for quite some time by this point, and they attacked the village, primarily to gain access to food. The Coronado expedition then turned east to central New Mexico. Although the Spanish found many communities along the Rio Grande, the Pueblo Indians of the area were no more enthusiastic about submitting to Spanish power or supplying the Spanish with food and provisions than the Zuni had been. The Pueblos quickly found that, rather than fight, the best solution seemed to be to keep the Spanish moving by assuring them that the real wealth was just over the horizon.
In 1541, the expedition set off into what are now northern Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas. The Spaniards met Teya Indians, seminomadic peoples who had found ways to live well in a harsh countryside far better than the Spaniards could. Coronado and his men did not, however, find gold or European-style cities. Finally, discouraged and with their supplies gone, they returned to Mexico City in 1542 with little to show for their efforts. It was decades before Spanish authorities would try again to settle in Arizona or New Mexico.
art I Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
Exploring the Mississippi River Valley: The De Soto
Expedition, 1539-1542
While Coronado was roaming the Southwest, another Spanish adventurer, Hernando de Soto, was exploring even more of the future United States. De Soto had won fame and gold through military exploits in Panama in the 1520s, and had been a part of Pizarros conquest of the Inca Empire in the 1530s. He was then given a royal charter to settle La Florida and the lands beyond. He would try again where Ponce de Leon and De Narvaez had failed. In 1539, he sailed to Florida with some 500 to 600 Spaniards and about 100 captive American Indians and Africans. The expedition also brought blacksmiths to make chains for the new slaves they expected to capture.
In northern Florida, near modern-day Tampa, they saw fields of corn and large towns led by powerful rulers. In 1540, the expedition moved into Georgia and the Carolinas. In a place they called Cofitachiqui, probably a Creek Indian village, the ruler, a young woman, greeted De Soto and “presented unto him great store of clothes of the country... and took from her own neck a great cordon of pearls, and cast it about the neck of the governor, entertaining him with very gracious speeches of love and courtesy.” De Soto responded by taking the princess prisoner and demanding that she guide his expedition over the Appalachian mountains to the gold he sought. She did lead them over the mountains, but then escaped, taking the pearls that she had given De Soto home with her. Other Indians who happened to be in De Sotos path would not be so fortunate.
As the expedition crossed the Appalachian Mountains into Tennessee, and on into Alabama and Mississippi, they were met by Native Americans bringing gifts; the Spaniards quickly tried to make the natives into guides and slaves. But as word of the Spaniards spread, they found fewer gifts and more hostility. De Soto reported well-populated lands. Later European explorers, however, found far fewer Indians, most likely because of diseases unintentionally brought by De Soto’s expedition.
In 1541, De Soto crossed the Mississippi River and explored what is now Arkansas and probably modern-day Texas. When they turned back to the Mississippi River, De Soto demanded that a nearby Native American town provide supplies and porters to help with the river crossing. When the village chief refused, De Soto ordered his soldiers to destroy the town; his journal reports that “the cries of the women and children were such as to deafen those who pursued them.’
2.3

Jacques Le Moyne, an early French colonist in Florida, drew this picture of an Indian queen being carried by high-ranking men. While the picture is from the later 1500s in Florida, the princess that the de Soto expedition met a few years earlier may well have been treated with similar respect.
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 43
-	De Soto himself died of fever on June 20, 1542. His fellow explorers sunk his body in the Mississippi River so the now-hostile Indians would not know their leader was gone. Then they built rafts and drifted down the river. After considerable hardship, 311 survivors—about half the original group—reached Mexico. They had not found much in North America that interested them.
	Exploring California: The Cabrillo Voyage, 1542-1543 While Coronado was exploring New Mexico and De Soto the Mississippi Valley, the Spanish authorities commissioned Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo to investigate the Pacific Coast. Cabrillo had come to New Spain as a young man and amassed a fortune, which
	he was prepared to use to outfit his own expedition in hopes of great returns. In 1542, Cabrillo sailed north from Mexico along the Pacific Coast with three ships “to discover
2J	the coast of New Spain” and continue until he reached China, which was assumed to be not far distant. Cabrillo s three ships left Navidad, Mexico, in June 1542, and by September had reached San Diego Bay in California. They exchanged gifts with friendly American Indians and reported seeing a beautiful land of valleys, savannas, high mountains, and smoke that indicated a large native population. Cabrillo called California a ‘good country where you can make a settlement.” He continued north along the Pacific Coast as far as the Russian River in northern California. Like many after him, Cabrillo overlooked the area of what is now San Francisco because of the heavy fog. He did, however, realize that in Monterey Bay— the future capital of Spanish and Mexican California—there was a fine harbor. After Cabrillo died of an injury while trying to rescue some of his men from an attack, the expedition returned to Mexico. They had found neither China nor the gold they sought. Early Settlements in Florida: Fort Caroline and St. Augustine, 1562-1565 After all these failed efforts, Spanish interest in the lands north of Mexico waned. The first actual European settlements in North America reflected the growing divisions in Europe itself. Catholic Spain now had to compete with France—a nation divided between Catholicism and Protestantism—and with Protestant England and Holland. Only when these other European powers showed an interest in North America did Spain set up permanent settlements there. No nation was more deeply split by the Protestant-Catholic divide than France, which had a large Protestant minority and a strong Catholic majority. It was from the French Protestants that the first settlers in Florida were recruited. In 1562, Gaspard de Coligny, a French Protestant nobleman and admiral, commissioned expeditions to Florida. Although there was no European settlement in Florida, it seemed to be a strategic location on the sea lanes between Spain’s empire in Mexico and South America and Spain itself. As a loyal subject of the French king, Coligny wanted to secure lands for France. He also wanted to create a safe haven for his fellow Protestants. In 1562, Coligny commissioned Jean Ribault to make an initial trip to Florida, and then commissioned a larger French expedition, including many families with their livestock, supplies, and tools, which sailed in 1564. The settlers moved to the mouth of the St. Johns River where Jacksonville, Florida, is today and built a town they named Fort Caroline after King Charles IX of France. They meant to stay and build their lives there. It would be a useful outpost for France, yet far enough away to avoid the political and religious turmoil of their homeland. The Spanish, however, considered this colony a major religious, political, and commercial threat to Spain s control of the Americas. Pedro Menendez de Aviles was given jurisdiction of a new Spanish colony to reach from Florida to Newfoundland and told to establish cities in Florida and oust the French Protestants. He did both. In 1565, Menendez de Aviles founded St. Augustine, today the oldest city of European origin in the United States. All the lands north and west of it, he declared, now belonged to the king of Spain. He began a friendly trade with the Timuca Indians
Part I Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
This illustration by Jacques Le Moyne shows the French, led by Jean Ribault, landing at the St. Johns River in Florida in May 1562 and being greeted by friendly Timuca Indians.
who lived in northern Florida and sought to convert them to Catholicism. The Timucas valued Spanish goods and provided the colony with food, root vegetables, wild fruit, fish, oysters, game, and corn, but they resisted religious conversion. Having established St. Augustine, De Aviles attacked Fort Caroline, killing all its inhabitants. When the French fleet coming to aid Fort Caroline was shipwrecked along the coast by a hurricane, De Aviles killed the survivors, too. Florida would remain in Spanish hands for centuries, and its bloody European beginnings mirrored Europe’s divisions.
Ihe founders of Spain’s first colonies in North America, like those who settled in Latin America, reflected the spirit of the Reconquista, or “reconquest,” of Spain itself when both Muslims and Jews were driven out of the country and religious and national unity were seen as one and the same. For hundreds of years, soldiers of Christian Spain fought against Muslims, whom they considered infidels, seeking to win military glory, wealth, and spiritual honor on the battlefield. It was a worldview in which religious fervor and military bravery were united in the service of the nation. After the victory over the last Muslim stronghold in Spain in 1492, the next generation of Spanish men could not hope for the success of their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers in Spain itself, but they brought the same mixture of military heroics and religious fervor to the Americas. In the 1500s, a way of looking at the world and especially at conquest that had been reshaping Spain itself for hundreds of years became the key to creating an ever-expanding empire in the Americas.
Cultural practices in Spain and other parts of Europe at the time may have also played a role in how ruthless the early Europeans were. Under a system of primogeniture, land was typically passed on to the oldest son. Younger sons, then, would not
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 45
23
have the same opportunities to acquire land and the wealth that went with it. Some would opt to spend their lives in the church, but many would opt to spend their lives as soldiers where, through conquest of new lands, they might be rewarded.
Unlike Mexico and Peru, the Spanish colonies in Florida were settled by soldiers who did not want to create a vast empire but valued the independence that distance from imperial authorities gave them and by families of artisans and farmers who meant to build a richer life than they could have in Spain. As citizens on the border between European settlement and American Indian territory, these settlers wanted to enjoy the municipal liberties that the free cities of Castile had enjoyed when they had represented the border between Christian and Muslim Spain. They also wanted to avoid the tightly ordered hierarchical society that was evolving in Mexico. The cities and the farms in Florida prospered. One settler recorded, “I have planted with my own hands grapevines, pomegranates, orange trees and figs, wheat, barley, onions, garlic and many vegetables that grow in Spain.” The colonists quickly took to the corn that was the staple of the Indian diet.
There were also slaves in St. Augustine from the beginning. Although his royal commission had authorized him to bring up to 500 African slaves to St. Augustine, De Aviles actually brought only about 50. In time, Spanish Florida had a black militia and included both African slaves and free Africans.
There was also intermarriage and more casual sexual encounters among Europeans, Native Americans, and Africans in Spanish Florida. In this outpost, the races blended, creating a new culture and new bloodlines. In addition, St. Augustine became a place where Europeans from other nations settled. Some settled of necessity after their ships were wrecked on the Florida coast. Others came to escape legal problems, military commitments, or families. Despite strict rules issued in Madrid, isolated places like St. Augustine reflected considerable diversity, including Jews escaping an increasingly intolerant Europe as well as French, Flemish, and German immigrants escaping religious persecution or simply wanting a new start in life.
After its founding in 1565 and up until 1705, St. Augustine was home to a large-scale effort to send Franciscan missionaries into the surrounding Native American territories. The Franciscans who traveled into the interior of Florida and Georgia to make converts also sought alliances with the Indians. Tribal leaders came to St. Augustine to trade and negotiate, and they accepted, however casually, Spanish rule. Eventually, about 80 mission centers were established from the Savannah River in Georgia to as far south as modern Daytona Beach. The Franciscans, however, also brought European diseases along with their preaching, and the American Indian population fell drastically. Nevertheless, for a century, Native Americans, missionaries, and soldiers traded religious and cultural ideas as well as the tools of commerce and war. They intermarried and substantially influenced each other and their offspring in Florida.
Despite occasional battles with the American Indians, raids by European navies, and hurricanes, life in Spanish Florida continued more or less uninterrupted well into the 1700s. While the English focused their efforts further north and the Spanish Empire centered on Mexico, Central, and South America, those who were in Florida were left alone. Except for a brief period of British rule between 1763 and 1784, Florida remained a Spanish colony until it was ceded to the United States in 1821, 256 years after the founding of St. Augustine.
Settling New Mexico: 1598
After Coronados expedition to explore the North American Southwest returned to Mexico City in 1542, there was little further exploration of New Mexico for over half a century. Then in 1598, the Spanish viceroy in Mexico City decided it was time for another look at the lands of the north and appointed a new governor for what was called “New Mexico.” The rumors that great wealth existed there had never died. More pragmatically, the Spanish were worried about the Protestant English. In 1579, Francis
46
Exploration, 1491-1607
Drake, an English privateer (a pirate working for the government), sailed up the coast of California, duplicating Cabrillos route (and his failure to find San Francisco). Drake then turned west and duplicated the route of an earlier Spanish explorer, Ferdinand Magellan, sailing across the Pacific and on around the world before returning to London in 1580. To the authorities in Spain, this achievement was a real threat. Settling the interior of North America suddenly seemed imperative.
Don Juan de Onate was appointed governor of New Mexico with instructions not to follow the harsh policies of Cortes or Pizarro. The King’s appointment letter said, You will endeavor to attract the natives with peace, friendship, and good treatment... and to induce them to hear and accept the holy gospel.” A succession of Spanish monarchs never approved of the viciousness of the conquistadors, though they accepted the gold and silver that flowed back to Spain without asking too many questions about how it was acquired.
Onate’s expedition included 400 men, women, and children, among them a few Spanish soldiers, Franciscan friars, and Indians, along with supply wagons, cattle, sheep, and mules. Onate’s wife, Isabel Tolosa Cortes Montezuma, was herself a granddaughter of Cortes and a great-granddaughter of the Aztec emperor Montezuma. On April 30, 1598, the expedition stopped on the banks of the Rio Grande and claimed all of the lands and peoples to the north for Spain. Onate named the place where he crossed the river El Paso del Norte the “pass to the north.” Since Coronado’s day, the Pueblo Indians had seen Spanish soldiers and missionaries come and go. The Spanish could be ruthless, but they also seemed to have little staying power. With the Onate expedition, Spanish occupation of New Mexico would come closer to being permanent.
Onate sought political allegiance from the Pueblos of southern New Mexico. In July 1598, he asked Pueblo chiefs to swear allegiance to Spain and convert to Christianity. Onate chose to interpret their lack of hostility as agreement. He also built a capital, which he named San Gabriel. Something resembling a permanent settlement of 400 Europeans in the middle of thousands of Pueblo Indians took shape.
At first all was peaceful. Onate divided New Mexico into administrative districts, each with a priest in each to try to convert the American Indians to Christianity. He allowed self-government to continue in each pueblo—he had little choice—but insisted that each one must have a political governor. He was more interested in exploring for the gold, silver, or pearls, which he was sure were just over the horizon, and did not try to force the Native Americans to labor for the Spanish.
The peace did not last, however. Zutucapan, the leader of the Acoma Pueblo, had avoided meeting Onate because he did not want to cede any authority to the Spaniards. Late in 1598, he attacked a Spanish scouting party, and in 1599, Onate struck back. After a fierce battle, the Spaniards, whose guns, swords, and horses gave them a huge advantage, burned Acoma to the ground. One thousand of its residents were killed, and the remaining 500 were taken as slaves. The male captives had one foot cut off. When the Jumano Indians also resisted Onate, he hanged their chiefs and burned their village.
Onate’s cruelty and his failure to find riches led to his recall in 1609. The new royal governor Don Pedro de Peralta moved the capital further north to a new town that he created and named Santa Fe, inl610. There Peralta built the oldest public building still standing in the United States—the governor’s mansion. The colony’s attention turned from gold to farming. Churches were built at the center of each pueblo. The Spanish hoped these churches would become new centers of Indian life and faith, but tensions would continue that would eventually culminate some 50 years later in a surprising revolt.
Quick Review How did Spanish exploration in North America change overtime? What was different between the exploration that took place between 1513 and 1543 and the latter developments between 1565 and 1598? Identify and explain factors that most contributed to this evolution.
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 47
2.4
EXPLORATION AND ENCOUNTER IN NORTH AMERICA: THE FRENCH
Analyze early French exploration and claims in North America.
King Francis I of France (r. 1515-1547) did not want to leave the Americas to Spain or Portugal (which was quickly developing its own empire in Brazil). In 1524, some 30 years after Columbus made his journey, the French king commissioned an Italian sailor, Giovanni da Verrazano, to explore the Atlantic coast and find a sea route to Asia for France. Verrazano sailed from Florida to Newfoundland but concluded that an entire continent divided the Atlantic from the Pacific. After Verrazano, French interest in North America focused further north, on the St. Lawrence River Valley and what became Canada, especially after Jacques Cartiers visit of 1534 to that region, and after the destruction of Fort Caroline in 1565, as well as on islands in the Caribbean. Eventually, while the Spanish explored the Mississippi River Valley north from the Gulf of Mexico, the French would explore the same river coming south from their settlements near the Mississippi’s headwaters and tributaries in what is today the Midwest.
First French Visit to the Atlantic Coast of the United States—
Verrazano, 1524
Verrazano’s ship La Dauphine left France in January 1524 and landed on what is now Cape Fear, North Carolina, 2 months later. He described the people he met there as, “of color russet, and not much unlike the Saracens; their hair black, thick, and not very long.” He wondered if they might be Chinese.
On April 17, 1524, Verrazano became the first European to sail into New York Harbor, describing how the inhabitants of Manhattan “came towards us very cheerfully, making shouts of admiration, showing us where we might come to land most safely with our boat.” He continued north, visiting Rhode Island’s Narragansett Bay, Maine, and Newfoundland, and he mapped much of the Atlantic Coast of the future United States and Canada before returning to France.
Jacques Cartier Seeks a Sea Route to Asia, 1534
In 1534, France tried again to find a northern sea route to Asia. Jacques Cartier was authorized to make the effort for France. Cartier did not find the route—which did not exist except through then-frozen Arctic ice—but he explored Newfoundland and the gulf of the St. Lawrence River, laying the basis for future French claims to these lands. He also began a trade in furs that would have great significance for French and English relations with American Indians.
On a second voyage in 1535-1536, Cartier explored the St. Lawrence River far upstream (see Map 2-2), coming to the sites of Quebec and Montreal. More than a thousand friendly Indians came to the river to greet him. He traded European goods, including knives, for food, beginning a trading relationship that would transform the lives of native tribes and Europeans. But Cartier stayed too long, and when the winter closed in, he could not return to France because the river froze over. Cartier spent a terrible winter on the St. Lawrence, buried in deep snow and losing a quarter of his crew to disease and cold. Although Cartier’s travels would be the basis for future French land claims, it would be another half-century before the French developed a serious interest in North America, after they discovered that there was no quick way around it to the Asian lands they really wanted to find.
2.4
Quick Review How did early French exploration differ from the Spanish? How was it similar?
48 Part I Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
1
EXPLORATION AND ENCOUNTER IN NORTH AMERICA- THE ENGLISH
2.5
Explain English explorers, privateers, and reasons for settlement.
Although Spanish conquistadors were the leading explorers of the Americas, an English-led expedition was among the first to follow Columbus. King Henry VII of England commissioned another Italian, Giovanni Caboto, or John Cabot, to sail across the Atlantic in 1497. Cabot made landfall in North America, most likely in Newfoundland, and may have traveled as far south as Maine. He did not meet any people, but erected a cross and banner to claim the lands for England. When he returned to London, he was given a rich reward.
In 1498, Cabot set out on a second voyage, but he and his companions disappeared— most likely their ships were sunk in a storm—and there is no clear evidence of further English discoveries or claims in the Americas until more than 50 years later when a very different England found new reasons to look more carefully across the Atlantic. England's Reformation Shapes the Country
In the early years of the Protestant Reformation, few would have predicted that England would break with the Roman Catholic Church. When he became king in 1509, Henry VIII was a good Catholic. He even wrote a defense of traditional Catholic doctrine that led the pope to give him the title “Defender of the Faith.” He had married Catherine of Aragon, daughter of the devoutly Catholic Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain. His closest advisor was Catholic Cardinal Thomas Wolsey. But Henry’s marriage problems would eventually reshape the country and help it gain a powerful role in the Atlantic World.
By the late 1520s, Henry wanted to end his marriage with Catherine. Five of their six children had died. Only a daughter named Mary survived, and Henry wanted a male heir. He had also fallen in love with Anne Boleyn, a young woman at the court. Under pressure from the king, the English clergy had agreed to dissolve the marriage. But Pope Clement VII needed political support from Catherine’s nephew, Charles V, King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor, who opposed the divorce. The pope stalled and refused to approve the divorce.
A century, even a decade, earlier Henry would have had little room to maneuver. Now the Protestant Reformation gave him an opening. In 1534, Parliament passed legislation ending papal authority in England and declared Henry and his successors to be “the only Supreme Head in earth of the Church of England.” Henry annulled his marriage to Catherine, married Anne, and celebrated the birth of a new daughter, Elizabeth, though he still longed for a son. He closed monasteries and sold off church land or used it to reward loyal followers. Henry did not embrace many Protestant teachings. Other than substituting his own authority for that of the pope, official Christianity in England remained closer to Catholicism than to the Protestantism of Luther or Calvin, a fact that would become especially significant in the next century.
When Henry died in 1547, England had three major religious groups. Some, known as Anglicans, were perhaps a majority and supported Henry s arrangement, including independence from the pope and preserving traditional Catholic religious forms. However, a growing Protestant minority, known as Puritans, wanted more radical religious change to “purify” the Church of England of Catholic practices, especially the leadership of bishops. In addition, many Roman Catholics could not agree to the break with Rome and remained loyal to the Catholic Church.
Henry’s successor was his 9-year-old son Edward VI (r. 1547-1553) from the king’s marriage to his third wife, Jane Seymour, after he tired of Anne and had her executed. In the end, Henry had six wives but only three children. The boy-king’s regents sought to make the English church more Protestant in its doctrines and rituals. But when Edward died at age 15, his half-sister Mary I became queen and returned England-briefly—to Catholicism. However, Mary also died after a reign of only 5 years. In 1558, Elizabeth I (r 1558-1603), daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, succeeded her.
Anglicans
Within the Church of England, one group of Protestants who wanted to establish a church that was led by the English monarchy.
Puritans
Individuals who believed that reforms of the Church of England had not gone far enough in improving the church.
23
23
23
24
23
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 49
Queen Elizabeth ruled England from 1558 to 1603 during which time the country prospered internally and emerged as a major sea power in the world.
Elizabeth’s reasons for embracing Protestantism were strong. If England were Catholic, then Henry’s marriage to her mother would be illegal, and Elizabeth would be an illegitimate child and unable to assume the throne. If England were Protestant, she had every right to be queen of England. And Elizabeth meant to be queen. She did not want her subjects fighting with each other, however. In the Act of Uniformity of 1559, Parliament declared that she was “Supreme Governor” of the Church of England. Worship should follow the Book of Common Prayer, which preserved many Catholic rituals within a Protestant theology. Every person in England was required to attend church once a week or face a fine. Catholics who refused to break with Rome were persecuted. But as long as Protestants agreed to the Act of Uniformity and to attend church services that followed the Book of Common Prayer, Elizabeth’s government left them free to disagree about their beliefs to their heart’s content.
During Elizabeth’s long reign, England became a major power in Europe and the world. Spain, under
King Philip II, grandson of Ferdinand and Isabella, was at the center of a Catholic revival, and Philip’s Spain and Elizabeth’s England became bitter rivals. Queen Elizabeth subsidized Protestant rebels against Spain’s rule of the Netherlands and even engaged in a correspondence with Ottoman Sultan Murad III about a possible joint Protestant-Muslim attack on Catholic Spain. King Philip, in return, plotted Elizabeth’s overthrow and made plans to invade England to secure Spain’s power and protect Catholic unity.
When Spain attacked England in July 1588, Spain’s navy, known as the Spanish Armada, was defeated by the English navy and destroyed by storms. After 1588, England’s navy dominated the Atlantic and eventually all of the world’s oceans. English sailors grew more skilled, the country’s shipbuilders became more sophisticated in their designs, and its navigators gained new understanding of winds and currents as well as their charts and instruments. For Elizabeth and many of her subjects, the defeat of the threatened Spanish Catholic invasion linked the Protestant religion and English patriotism indissolubly in their minds. A small nation, on the margins of Europe, was suddenly a major player in an emerging Atlantic world.
Elizabethan Explorers and Pirates
While Elizabeth I ruled England, English adventurers, with her support, set out to make a place for themselves in the new oceanic world. English and other European fishermen had fished off the North Atlantic coast of North America since the early 1500s. By the 1580s, however, warfare and piracy became the dominant role of the English who visited the Americas. Building settlements at that time was not a priority. If powerful Catholic Spain was exploiting the continents for gold and silver, England saw no reason not to relieve the Spanish ships of some of their treasure without going to the trouble of mining it themselves.
Francis Drake was perhaps the most famous pirate—or privateer as they were known when their exploits were commissioned by the government. Drake was licensed for piracy by Queen Elizabeth. Licensing individual captains to harass the Spanish treasure fleets was far cheaper than supporting a large royal navy, and the English government, at minimal risk, kept a fifth of whatever the pirates brought to England. Indeed, pirates may have supplied 10 percent of English imports in the 1590s. The decades of legalized piracy also helped expand the technical knowledge of English mariners. The role of this piracy was instrumental in laying a foundation for England’s sea power.
50 Parti Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607

Exploration on MyHistoryLab
HOW DID GLOBAL EXPLORATION CHANGE THE OLD AND NEW WORLD?
Beginning in the 1400s, explorers left Europe and headed west in search of faster trade routes to Asia to keep up with the growing European demand for luxury goods such as silk and spices.
In the process, they encountered huge civilizations in the Americas: complex societies that often had high levels of economic and social interconnectedness. Over the next 2 centuries, Europeans attempted to conquer these Native American societies by force, set up colonies, and establish trade ties, connecting the Old World (Europe, Asia, and Africa) with the New World (the Americas). This Age of Global Exploration had a profound impact on world history and was especially destructive to societies in the Americas as vast numbers of people in New World succumbed to Old World diseases.
This illustration (c. 1500) of Italian origin is said to show the first European representation of people in the New World. Sadly it does not reflect much respect for the people who had so recently come to the attention of Europe.
POPULATIONS OF PRECONTACT NATIVE AMERICAN AND COLONIAL POWERS (C.
1500) The Americas	Colonial Powers*
23
12
23
23
The Americas (60-70 million)	Colonial Powers (29.7 million)
Note: Each figure represents a million people. *Colonial Powers: England, Spain, Portugal, France.
24
KEY QUESTIONS
Use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions:
Analysis ►►► What global trade routes existed in the Old World prior to the Age of Global Exploration?
Map the late medieval trade contacts between Europe, Asia, and North Africa.
Comparison ►►► In what ways were societies in the Americas interrelated before the arrival of the Europeans?
Map the economic interconnectedness of the New World.
Consequence ►►► How did the new trans-Atlantic trade connect different parts of the world?
Map the integration of the Old and New Worlds into a single trading network.
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 51
2.1
22
23
2A
John White, himself an early English settler, drew this picture of a "woman and child of Pomelooc" in an effort to describe the Algonquians with whom the first English explorers came into contact.
Francis Drake was an explorer as well as a privateer. During his voyage around the globe from 1577 to 1580—the first commander of such an expedition to survive— he confirmed the contours of the Americas for the English. He then continued across the Pacific and around Africa before returning to London. In 1585, he attacked and burned St. Augustine, Florida. In 1588, he helped defeat the Spanish Armada. His exploits brought considerable wealth to Queen Elizabeth’s England while weakening Spanish control of the seas. By the time Drake died in 1596, while again harassing the Spanish in Central America, English sailors were confident that they could travel anywhere without trouble, even if Spain still controlled the most valuable land in the Americas.
Walter Raleigh and the "Lost Colony" of Roanoke
In 1584, an ambitious young man, Walter Raleigh, was authorized by England to use his own funds to occupy lands in North America. Raleigh’s role was to fund and authorize the missions. At the time, England and Raleigh himself were most interested in establishing a base from which privateers like Drake could easily operate and profit financially from these missions. Ihe first mission in 1584 was a reconnaissance trip to identify potential sites. Ihe small group discovered Roanoke Island and was received warmly by the Algonquian people, two of whom (Manteo and Wanchese) returned to England with the crew. In 1585, Raleigh sent 100 young men back to Roanoke on the Outer Banks of North Carolina along with the two Algonquian emissaries. It was the first English colony in what is now the United States. It was also short lived. When the men landed, one of their ships ran aground, and most of the food they had brought was ruined. Ihe Roanoke Indians were not happy to feed the colonists whom they began to suspect of trying to dominate them, and a battle broke out in 1586 in which the Roanoke chief, Wingina, was killed. When Francis Drake arrived later that spring to rest his crews and refit his ships, he found the survivors in disarray. Instead of refitting, he agreed to take the survivors back to England when they decided to abandon the colony.
Raleigh was not discouraged, however. If a colony of men could not succeed, then perhaps one composed of families could. In 1587, he convinced English investors to create a new colony in a location on the Chesapeake Bay, which would have more navigable waters than the shallows around Roanoke. Colonists were promised 500 acres per family, a huge estate for the times, though one might question England’s authority to give away land claimed by the Algonquians. Some 100 people left England to create this new colony, but events along the way landed them instead back at Roanoke, amid the Algonquians who had fought their predecessors. Nevertheless the colony was established, houses built, and the settlers began their new lives in this isolated place. Virginia Dare was born and baptized in this colony soon after the families arrived. She was the first English child known to be born in what is now the United States.
But the 1587, Roanoke colony also failed. Indeed, it came to be known as the Lost Colony.” The settlers had been left in what seemed like reasonably good shape with a promise that resupply ships would arrive the following spring. However, no ships were allowed to leave England in 1588 because of the threatened Spanish attack. The government commandeered every ship to oppose the mighty Spanish Armada. Nor did weather help the colony. Between 1587 and 1589, the worst drought in the area in 800 years struck. If the experience of later col-
onies is any guide, drought increased tensions with nearby American Indians who became much more reluctant to provide food when they faced their own shortages. When John White finally returned to Roanoke with the promised supplies in 1590,
52 Parti Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
he found the colony abandoned. Whether the colonists were massacred or simply melted into the surrounding Indian tribes is unknown.
Quick Review How did Francis Drake contribute to English wealth and power without establishing any colonies? Why were the English slower to establish colonies in the Americas than the Spanish or the French?
CONCLUSION
Through most of the 1500s, Cabrillos, De Sotos, and Coronados expeditions for Spain; Verrazano’s and Cartier s voyages for France; and Raleighs colonizing efforts for England were considered total failures. Fortunes had been spent, but few permanent settlements had been made. The explorers had found no gold and no quick route to China in the lands north of Mexico. Nevertheless, Spain, France, and England now had a much clearer picture of the geography of North America. Many of the native peoples of North America also had at least a vague knowledge of the militaristic Europeans whose presence would change everything for future generations. Half a century after Columbus had first landed, the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and most of the southern half of the United States had been the scene of many contacts between American Indians, Europeans, and often Africans. Even more than 100 years after Columbus, settlement was limited to a few Spanish posts in Florida and New Mexico. For the American Indians, Europeans were people who came quickly and left almost as quickly While disease decimated some tribes, for most of the surviving native peoples of North America, daily life in the early 1550s, even in 1600, was barely different from what it had been a century before. They might have a few new trade goods or may have engaged in an occasional skirmish with Europeans, but that was about it. That situation would change quickly after 1600, however, as three great European powers, Spain, France, and England—and smaller ones including the Netherlands and Sweden— would establish permanent settlements and vie for control of North America.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
2.5
How did European politics, economics, and religious issues lead to exploration and settlement in America? Of these three, which is the single most important category? Why?
Chapter 2 First Encounters, First Conquests 53
Chapter 2 Chapter Review
24
COLUMBUS, THE COLUMBIAN EXCHANGE, AND EARLY CONQUESTS________________________________________________
Explain the reasons behind the voyages of Columbus, and describe early Spanish encounters with the peoples of the Caribbean, Mexico, and South America.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
What do Columbus’s words and actions on arriving in the New World tell us about his motives for making his voyages?
2.	Crafting an Argument
Why did native populations decline so rapidly after 1492? Which cause for this was most important? Why?
3.	Historical Interpretation
Who were the winners and losers in the shift toward an ocean-focused global trade system?
A DIVIDED EUROPE: THE IMPACT OF THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION
Explain how the Protestant Reformation and the development of the nation-state changed Europe and European ideas about how best to settle and govern America.
Review Question
4.	Historical Interpretation
How did political and religious developments in 16th-century Europe shape the course of European settlement in the Americas?
EXPLORATION AND ENCOUNTER IN NORTH AMERICA: THE SPANISH
23
Analyze early Spanish exploration of America north of Mexico.
Review Questions
5.	Contextualization
Why did the French try to colonize Florida? Why did the Spanish respond to these efforts as they did?
6.	Historical Interpretation
How do you account for the failure to follow up on the De Soto, Coronado, and Cabrillo expeditions? Why did Spanish authorities remain uninterested in the future United States for so long?
7.	Contextualization
How did the Pueblos respond to early Spanish efforts to find gold in their territory? What does their response tell us about their strategies for dealing with these newcomers?
EXPLORATION AND ENCOUNTER IN NORTH AMERICA: THE FRENCH
2.4
Analyze early French exploration and claims in North America.
Review Question
8.	Comparison
Compare French lack of interest in a permanent settlement in the northern parts of the future United States and Canada in the 1500s with French and Spanish interest in settlement in Florida. How do you account for the differences?
2.5
EXPLORATION AND ENCOUNTER IN NORTH AMERICA:
THE ENGLISH
_________________________________ Explain English explorers, privateers, and reasons for settlement.
Review Questions
9.	Chronological Reasoning
How did events in the decades before Elizabeth I came to the throne shape her religious policies?
10.	Contextualization
Why did contemporaries see most of the European expeditions in North America during the 1500s as failures?
Part I Contact and Exploration, 1491-1607
Settlements Old and New
1607-1754
PART
PART OUTLINE
