Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 241
9.1
1800	1820	1840	1860
Year
FIGURE 9-1 Cotton Exports as a Percentage of All U.S. Exports, 1800-1860. This graph illustrates the growing significance of cotton in the U.S. economy during the early 1800s. While all exports from the country were growing, cotton was quickly outstripping everything else, increasing from a tiny fraction in 1800 to one-third of all exports in the 1820 and to more than half by 1840.
steam engine, designed in 1763, added steam power to the English mills, expanding their size long before it provided the energy for railroads and ships.
Although developed in England, much of this technology was soon brought to the United States through transfers, legal or otherwise. British authorities knew that their new means of production were key to their industrial and political might. They provided patents for their inventors and kept their production process secret. However, in 1789, an Englishman, Samuel Slater, having been sworn to secrecy and apprenticed in Arkwright’s textile business, sailed to New York to bring the industry to the United States. Slater ignored Arkwright’s patents and recreated Arkwright’s mechanical spinning in mills in Rhode Island. More technological transfers followed.
Despite the worldwide demand for cotton and England’s growing industrial capacity for turning raw cotton into cloth, American farmers and plantation owners were skeptical that they could make money on it. Green-seed, or upland, cotton was the only kind that would grow in the American South, except for a few places on the coast or coastal islands where a more profitable variety of long-stem cotton grew. But each ball of cotton produced on a green-seed cotton plant contained many of those green seeds. They had to be removed by hand before the cotton could be spun into threads. A slave, working hard all day, could clean about 1 pound of cotton, hardly enough to make a meaningful profit. Many people sought a mechanical way to clean cotton. Eli Whitney, a recent Yale graduate who had gone south to work as a tutor, lived on the Greene family plantation at Mulberry Grove in Georgia where he became interested in devising a machine to clean cotton. He gained fame, if not fortune, for his patent on the cotton gin (gin was short for engine).
While serving as a tutor and tinkering with how to clean cotton, Whitney decided to try pulling the picked cotton through a screen that would allow the seeds to fall out and the clean cotton fibers to be baled for shipment. When the first model failed because the wooden teeth were too brittle, Catherine Greene, the matron of the plantation, suggested wire (from her bird cage) and a brush to keep the seeds from clogging the works. The cotton gin that Whitney patented in 1794 could clean 50 pounds of cotton a day. Others quickly improved on Whitney’s model, and manufacturing cotton gins became a big business from Natchez, Mississippi, to Bridgewater, Massachusetts.
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Whitney did not make his fortune from this invention; too many other people were improving it too quickly. However, he did become rich developing the idea of interchangeable parts and manufacturing rifles with such parts for the U.S. government. Interchangeable parts made everything from rifles to farm implements easier to repair since a replacement part could be counted on to work in the original gun or machine.
The cotton gin transformed the nation. The United States now had an export crop that could make it prosperous. The cotton market and the technology that made it possible led to the rapid development of new lands, especially the great plantations of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. In turn, the New England factory system that began in Rhode Island expanded to the great mill center of Lowell, Massachusetts, in 1823 and then to factories and factory towns all over the region. As the cotton market continued to grow, coastal and transatlantic shipping also expanded as more and more southern cotton was brought to the mills of New England and to the even larger mills of Manchester and Birmingham in England itself. This rather plain and simple product was a driving force for economics and technology in the period, and it seemed to have no limits.
The Land of Cotton
While some of the nations first export cotton, the long-stem variety, was grown along the Atlantic coast and especially on the Sea Islands off the coast of the Carolinas and Georgia, the greatest cotton production involved the green-seed variety on the plantations of the so-called black belt (named for its rich black soil), stretching from Georgia to Louisiana. The quality of the soil made it perfect for growing cotton.
Within this black-belt area, only Georgia was one of the 13 original states. The northern parts of Alabama and Mississippi were part of the land Britain ceded to the United States at the end of the Revolution. The Louisiana Purchase added Louisiana. Andrew Jackson’s defeat of the Creeks during the War of 1812 and the “Creek Cession” that he negotiated in 1816 opened much new land to white settlement, while the 1819 U.S. treaty with Spain placed the Gulf Coast of Mississippi and Alabama under U.S. control. White settlers—often single men, sometimes families—from Georgia, Tennessee, the Carolinas, and Europe, especially many Scots-Irish, poured in and brought black slaves with them. A land rush that was known as “Alabama Fever” began in 1816 just as the War of 1812 ended. Alabama was admitted as a state in 1819 with a non-Indian population of 128,000, five times what it had been in 1810. Louisiana and Mississippi were admitted in 1812 and 1817, respectively (see Map 9-1).
The federal government played a central role in the development of these lands. The first European settlers were illegal white squatters moving onto farms recently abandoned by Indians, but after the coming of peace in 1815, the federal government quickly began official surveys and legal sales of the land. Before the War of 1812, the largest sales of federal lands in 1 year had been 350,000 acres. In 1815, a million acres of newly acquired lands were sold at $2 per acre, and in 1818, 2.5 million acres were sold as the government acquired land from the Creeks and then from Spain and quickly made it available for sale. These sales helped the federal budget, and white settlement surged. The government spent some of the revenue from land sales on maintaining the army that protected the new lands. It also aided settlement by building a road from Columbia, South Carolina, to Columbus, Georgia, and then farther into the black-belt region (see Map 9-2).
The new land was fertile. Planters who had grown 300 pounds of cotton per acre in South Carolina could grow 800 to 1,000 pounds an acre in the black belt. In 1801, nine percent of the world’s cotton came from the United States while 60 percent came from India. By 1820, the United States was exporting more cotton than India. By 1850, the American South was producing more than two-thirds of the world s cotton. The new technology, the new land, and the institution of slavery created great wealth for some; a poor, hard-earned living for others; and backbreaking, torturous misery for slaves.
black belt
The cotton-growing region that was developed in the early 1800s, stretching from Georgia through Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, named for its rich black soil.
9.1
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 243
NEW
SPAIN
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
500 kilometers
MAP 9-1 The Growth of Slavery in the Black Belt. As the black-belt area of cotton production expanded, slave labor became they key to its success and the number of slaves grew dramatically.
M
More than 50% slave QH 10% to 50% slave
|	, ) Less than 10% slave
□ No slaves, or no statistics available
250	500 miles
The People Who Worked the Land—Cotton and the Transformation of Slavery
The white settlers who were able to buy large parcels of land in the rich new territory of what was known as the Old Southwest did not do most of the hard work of actually planting, hoeing, and picking the cotton that would be grown there. Other Americans did that work: African slaves, whose lives were also transformed by the explosive growth of cotton production and whose value to their white owners increased even more than the value of the new land on which they labored.
Between 1800 and 1860, more than 1 million black Americans were forced to move from the homes they knew—and often from their families, too—to new homes in the interior cotton-growing lands of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana and later Arkansas and Texas. While slavery slowly disappeared in the North after 1800 and the slave population of Maryland, Virginia, and the Carolinas stabilized or declined, slavery exploded in the new land. In the 60 years before the Civil War, more slaves made the journey from coastal states to inland plantations than had made the terrible Middle Passage from Africa to North America in the previous 200 years.
In some ways similar to the passage from Africa to North America, the journey from a settled community in Virginia, Maryland, or the Carolinas to the new interior plantations was a terrible ordeal. As more slaves were sold into the interior or sold from place to place within it, slaves on the coast lived in terror of being sold and los-ing all connections to family and birthplace. Slave owners used the threat of sale, or the sale of a perceived troublemaker, to maintain discipline in the slave quarter. Slaves often pleaded with masters not to be sold. Sometimes the pleas were successful but often not. Jeff Randolph, the executor of Thomas Jefferson’s estate, was considered especially humane because he refused to sell the former president’s slaves to a buyer from Georgia but sold them instead, at less profit, to other Virginians. The sale of a
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
MAP 9-2 The Expanding Cotton Belt. The areas of greatest cotton production in the United States grew dramatically between 1801 and 1860.
spouse broke up one slave marriage in five, and one-third of all slave children were sold away from their parents. Men were sold more often than women; planters wanted male muscle, and slave owners in older regions were happy to keep women so that they could bear more children who could, in turn, also be sold. Slaves between ages 14 and 35 were sold much more often than the very young or the aging. A literate slave, Arena Screven, learned that he was to be sold from Georgia to New Orleans and wrote to his wife “with much regret” that he hoped “if we shall not meet in this world I hope to meet in heaven.” Laura Clark, a slave, remembered her mother asking another slave, who had been sold in the same group as she to “take care of my baby child... and if I never sees her no more raise her for God.” Such heartbreak led many slaves to despair, to run away, or to rebel.
Once sold, either to a plantation owner who had come east for additional slaves or more often to a slave trader whose job was brokering other humans, slaves were organized in groups called slave coffles to walk west. Coffles of 20 to 50 slaves, sometimes more, trudging west became a normal sight of southern life. Walking 15 to 20 miles a day, it could take the slaves 2 months to go from Virginia to the Mississippi Valley, often longer when rain flooded streams and turned roads to mud. In later years, more slaves were transported by ship to New Orleans, which became the largest slave-trading center in the United States by the 1820s.
When they could, slaves rebelled. Slave trading was a dangerous business, and stories of slaves murdering slave traders were well known. In 1841, slaves being shipped from Norfolk, Virginia, to New Orleans on the Creole forced the captain to deliver them to the Bahamas, a British colony, where they found freedom because Britain had abolished slavery in 1833. More often, slaves simply ran away when they could, though many went home to family where they were recaptured and sold again.
Once slaves arrived at their destination, they often faced difficult and unfamiliar work. Work in cotton fields was backbreaking for men, women, and children. While tobacco and rice required more skill, cotton required long hours and hard work.
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 245
L
9.1
Cotton was planted in the early spring and required constant attention and weeding throughout the growing season. On most plantations, there was a strict gender divide: men plowed, and women and children hoed. Harvest began as early as August and lasted through September and October. Slaves worked the longest hours—from sunrise to sunset, and if there was a moon, much longer—to get the whole crop in before storms could hurt it. Prickly cotton pods cut their hands, and slaves who did not produce their quota were beaten at day’s end. Finally, with the full crop in, there was a brief respite. But the winter was the time for the women to work the cotton gin and pack the cotton for market while men cleared more land and repaired buildings.
Contrary to many images of the old South, most cotton was grown on relatively small farms. Many of those who first settled and began growing cotton on the new rich lands owned relatively small plots of land and one or a few slaves. These white owners worked in the fields with the slaves or, if the farm was larger, served as their overseers. Less than one percent of the population owned the great plantations for which the South became known. In the largest plantations owned by the most wealthy planters, slaves worked in large gangs with certain slaves appointed as “drivers” to get the work done and poor whites employed as overseers to manage the whole labor force. It was on the large plantations, with constant pressure on the overseers to ensure profits, that slaves faced some of the worst conditions.
Slaves established new communities within the slave quarters. Young slaves met new partners, children were born, and the rhythms of community life were reestablished, but always under threat of dissolution. New leaders emerged within the slave community, often preachers and deacons selected by other slaves. Although legally banned from learning to read or write, slaves sometime secretly did both and taught others to do so. As memories of Africa or the African-American communities on the east coast faded in later generations, a new culture was created in the slave communities, drawing on older traditions and adapting to new contexts. Often with the permission of their owners, slaves grew their own food, made cloth for better clothing than their owners gave them, and even earned cash by selling surplus food and clothing to the free people in surrounding communities or to their own masters. While owners saw slaves exclusively as a source of muscle and work, many slaves and ex-slaves made it clear through their stories that for them family, community, faith, and the
As this picture illustrates, slaves spent long hours in the fields surrounded by the cotton they were expected to cultivate and pick with no reward for their backbreaking labor.
i6 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
American Voices
Charles Ball, Fifty Years in Chains; or, The Life of an American Slave, 1810-1860
Charles Ball was born a slave on a tobacco plantation in Maryland. He remembered his grandfather telling of being captured into slavery in Africa. After establishing his own family in Maryland, Ball was sold to a slave trader who in turn sold him to a cotton and rice plantation in Georgia. He never saw his home or family again. Haifa century later, he escaped, hid on a ship bound for Philadelphia, and lived out his days in freedom. His autobiography, Fifty Years in Chains, was a popular publication among abolitionists—those who supported the end of slavery.
My master kept a store at a small village on the bank of the
Patuxent River....Whilst I was eating in the kitchen, I observed him talking earnestly, but low, to a stranger near the kitchen door. I soon after went out, and hitched my oxen to the cart, and was about to drive off, when several men came round about me, and amongst them the stranger whom I had seen speaking with my master. This man came up to me, and, seizing me by the collar, shook me violently, saying I was his property, and must go with him to Georgia. At the sound of these words, the thoughts of my wife and children rushed across my mind, and my heart beat away within me. I saw and knew that my case was hopeless, and that resistance was vain, as there were near twenty persons present, all of whom were ready to assist the man by whom I was kidnapped. I felt incapable of weeping or speaking, and in my despair I laughed loudly. My purchaser ordered me to cross my hands behind, which were quickly bound with a strong cord; and he then told me that we must set out that very day for the South. I asked if I could not be allowed to go see my wife and children, or if this could not be
permitted, if they might have leave to come to see me; but was told that I would be able to get another wife in Georgia.
My new master, whose name I did not hear, took me that same day across the Patuxent, where I joined fifty-one other slaves.... A strong iron collar was closely fitted by means of a padlock round each of our necks. A chain of iron, about a hundred feet in length, was passed through the hasp of each padlock, except at the two ends, where the hasps of the padlock passed through a link of the chain....
Our master ordered a pot of mush to be made for our supper; after dispatching which all lay down on the naked floor to sleep in our handcuffs and chains. The women, my fellow-slaves, lay on one side of the room; and the men who were chained with me, occupied the other. I slept but little this night, which I passed in thinking of my wife and little children whom I could not hope ever to see again. I also thought of my grandfather, and of the long nights I had passed with him, listening to his narratives of the scenes through which he had passed in Africa.
Source: Charles Ball, Fifty Years in Chains; or, The Life of An American Slave (New York:
H.
Dayton, 1860), pp. 28-31,240-241,280. Thinking Critically
I.
Documentary Analysis What aspects of his sale were most traumatizing for Ball? Why?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light does Ball's story shed on major trends in slavery and slave ownership in the first half of the 1800s?
9.1
it '
in

hope for freedom were the highest priority. Studies of the advertisements for runaway slaves also made it clear that slaves never stopped running away no matter how far they might have to run. Similarly, small- and large-scale slave revolts never stopped.
Cotton in the North—Factories and the People Who Worked in Them
The technology that made cotton the core of the Industrial Revolution in the United States developed in England and North America during the 1700s. Just before the War of 1812, American Francis Cabot Lowell, who had spent 2 years working in and observing the British mills in Manchester, brought the technology he learned there to the United States. When he left Britain, customs agents searched his baggage to be sure he was not bringing with him drawings or plans from the British mills, which were a closely guarded national secret. But Lowell had simply been memorizing the plans. Like Slater, an Englishman who had transferred British secrets about mechanic spinning to Rhode Island mills in 1789, Lowell was ready to build a British-style mill in Massachusetts. Lowell also brought with him a second, equally important idea—the multishareholder corporation that could raise more money than any one individual could provide and could offer less risk to investors.
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 247
^2
In 1813, Lowell incorporated a new business with Patrick T. Jackson and Nathan Appleton: the Boston Manufacturing Company. Lowell and his mechanic, Paul Moody, recreated a British-style power loom in Massachusetts. With these steps, they established what would be the heart of American manufacturing for the next century: the multiowner corporation that produced cotton fabric in a large factory.
The partners built their first factory, or mill, at Waltham, Massachusetts, on the Charles River. After Lowell’s death in 1817, they then created a new city in 1823: Lowell, Massachusetts, that housed an even larger complex, using the 30-foot drop of the Merrimack River to power mills that could turn cotton into cloth for a domestic and international market at an astounding rate. Similar large operations sprang up on New Hampshire rivers in Manchester, Dover, and Nashua and on other Massachusetts rivers in Chicopee, Holyoke, and Lawrence. Where Samuel Slater’s mills in Rhode Island had been rather small, family affairs, the factories and towns that Lowell and his colleagues built transformed the industry and the lives of the people involved in it. With the creation of Lowell as a new industrial city, the American Industrial Revolution was born.
The Boston Associates needed workers for their giant looms and mills. They turned first to young women from the farms where most New Englanders still lived. More men than women had been heading west for decades, and New England had a surplus of young women. Farm life was hard, young women were kept in subservient positions, and the independence and the potential to earn their own money appealed to many young women. To avoid the squalid conditions of the English factories, Lowell and his colleagues built clean, company boarding houses for their female employees, complete with chaperones and opportunities for religious and educational activities. For the most part, they hired only single young women whose living conditions (and virtue) they could control (see Map 9-3).
The young women who worked in Lowell’s mills in the early 1800s were known as “factory girls.” Lowell was a show town, and its owners published the Lowell Offering to tell the world about the success of the venture and the good life the women who worked there enjoyed. The Lowell Offering attracted new investors to the business and new young recruits to work in the mills. But life at Lowell and the other mill towns was less rosy than the Lowell Offering reported. Conditions may have been better than in the “dark satanic mills” of Britain, but the work was hard, the hours long, and the conditions harsh.
This idealized print of women working at their machines gives little hint of the noise, danger, and drudgery of 14-hour work days where a moment's lack of attention could lead to a disaster.
!48 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
□ Other buildings (mostly residences)
9.1
92
93
MAP 9-3 Lowell, Massachusetts in 1832. The water-powered mills of the new company town of Lowell, Massachusetts, had to be very close to the rivers that surrounded the town, but the company also built boarding houses for the workers in close proximity to the mills making the trip to work and the supervision of the workers quite easy.
A
New Hampshire newspaper, the Dover Gazette, friendly to the factory girls, reported on an 1834 strike by the young women, one of the first strikes in America: In consequence of the notice... [that] their wages would be reduced, to enable their employers to meet the “unusual pressure of the times,” the girls, to the number of between 600 and 700, assembled in the Court-House on Saturday afternoon, to devise ways and means to enable themselves to meet the “pressure of the times” anticipated from this threatened reduction.
The first strikes did not last long and did not win concessions. The company had too much power and the women too little. Still, news of the unrest tarnished the image of Lowell as a benevolent community run in the interests of its workers. A second strike 2 years later—described by one of the participants in the following American Voices feature—also failed.
By the 1840s, conditions had become much tougher in Lowell. The mill owners’ benevolence had worn off. The option of quitting and returning home, which had provided a way to escape the mill life during the 1830s, was disappearing because of an agricultural depression in New England. Young women stayed in Lowell, not necessarily because they wanted to, but because they had few other choices. Period publications like The Voice of Industry published their letters and articles, which described the challenges they faced and what hopes they had. One woman, known
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 249
9.1
92
93
only as Ada, shared these challenges and hopes in biblical terms that her peers would appreciate:
“Do unto others, as ye would that they should do to you,” is a great precept, given to us by our great Teacher....What but the neglect of this great principle, has brought into the world all this confusion, this disorder, this isolated state of interest, between man and man; all this monopoly and competition in business?
As the Industrial Revolution expanded, Ada would not be the last one to ask that question.
New York and the International Cotton Trade
As significant as the mills of New England were in cotton production, most American cotton was shipped in its raw state to Manchester and Leeds in England. The permanent peace that had been established between the United States and Great Britain after the end of the War of 1812 made this trade easy. New York City became the center of the shipment of cotton across the Atlantic and, in the process, became the nations largest city and commercial center, a position it has retained ever since.
New York City enjoyed several advantages that allowed it to play such a dominant role in the nation’s cotton economy, even though no cotton was grown within hundreds of miles of the city and few cotton mills were nearby. First, New York had an extraordinary deep-water harbor. Ships could dock directly in Manhattan and
American Voices
H.
Robinson worked in the cotton mills at Lowell from B * 1835 to 1848. She was 10 when she began and left at age 23 to be married. She published her story half a century later. The book, Loom and Spindle: Or Life Among the Early Mill Girls, remains a classic story of what life was like for the first generation of young women, most fresh from the farms, to take these jobs. The working-hours of all the girls extended from five o'clock in the morning until seven in the evening, with one-half hour for breakfast and for dinner....
One of the first strikes of cotton-factory operatives that ever took place in this country was that in Lowell, in October, 1836. When it was announced that the wages were to be cut down, great indignation was felt, and it was decided to strike, en mass. This was done. The mills were shut down, and the girls went in procession...and listened to "incendiary" speeches from early labor reformers.
One of the girls stood on a pump, and gave vent to the feelings of her companions in a neat speech, declaring that it was their duty to resist all attempts at cutting down the wages. This was the first time a woman had spoken in public in Lowell, and the event caused surprise and consternation among her audience....
My own recollection of this first strike (or "turn out" as it was called) is very vivid. I worked in a lower room, where I had heard the proposed strike fully, if not vehemently, discussed; I had been an ardent listener to what was said against this attempt at
"oppression" on the part of the corporation, and naturally I took sides with the strikers. When the day came on which the girls were to turn out, those in the upper rooms started first, and so many of them left that our mill was at once shut down. Then, when the girls in my room stood irresolute, uncertain what to do, asking each other, "Would you?" or "shall we turn out?" and not one of them having the courage to lead off, I, who began to think they would not go out, after all their talk, became impatient, and started on ahead, saying, with childish bravado, "I don't care what you do, I am going to turn out, whether anyone else does or not;" and I marched out, and was followed by the others.
As I looked back at the long line that followed me, I was more proud than I have ever been since at any success I may have achieved, and more proud than I shall ever be again until my own beloved State gives to its women citizens the right of suffrage.
Source: Harriet H. Robinson, Loom and Spindle: Or Life Among the Early Mill Girls (Boston: T.Y. Crowell, 1898.), pp. 31,83-85.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Robinson explain the factors that led to her decision to join the strike at her mill?
2.	Contextualization
How did work in a textile factory change Robinson's outlook?
What connections can you make between her strike experience and her commitment to the suffrage movement?
!50 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Brooklyn without needing to anchor offshore and unload goods to smaller boats. The port was also easily accessible by coastal vessels from southern ports. As the production of cotton expanded after 1815, most of the South’s cotton was shipped north to New York and then reshipped either across the Atlantic to English ports or up Long Island Sound to Boston for the New England mills. Second, New York already had the infrastructure necessary to accommodate this level of shipping, including miles of docks and a community of merchants. Third, New York, an established port already, had experienced workers, including dockworkers and longshoremen (who handled cargo), to handle the hundreds of ships that did business there. The already large numbers of workers grew rapidly as New York (not counting Brooklyn, which was a separate city until 1898) grew six times its size between the American Revolution and 1820. In 1820, it mushroomed again from 125,000 residents, and to over 500,000 in 1850.
New York businesses sent agents (called “factors”) to Charleston, South Carolina; Savannah, Georgia; Mobile, Alabama; and New Orleans to buy cotton for shipment to New York. In turn, the cotton was transferred from coastal ships to larger transatlantic ships that sailed to ports in England, racing each other to make the trip in the shortest amount of time.
On the return trip from England, these ships brought cash from the sale of cotton and all sorts of British and European goods—iron and steel tools from Sheffield, England, wine from France, and manufactured goods that the United States needed and that could often be bought in New York for less than it cost to make them elsewhere in America. While American manufacturers disliked this reality, merchants from across the country flocked to New York to stock up on cheap goods, enhancing the city’s commerce.
In 1818, shipping across the Atlantic was improved when a Quaker businessman, Jeremiah Thompson, founded the Black Ball Line and established a fixed schedule of weekly departures of fast ships from New York to Liverpool, England. The Black Ball Line announced that it had “undertaken to establish a line of vessels between NEW YORK and LIVERPOOL, to sail from each place on a certain day in every month through the year,” and printed the schedule. Until that time, commercial vessels waited to fill their holds with cargo, however long that took, before sailing. Now with the fixed schedule, passengers and goods could be sure of leaving on time, and factories in England could be sure of a steady flow of cotton to keep their mills operating.
The new ships were called packet ships because the line had a contract with the federal government to carry packets of U.S. mail. These packet ships became a regular feature of world commerce and New York’s waterfront. Any packet ship captain who made the trip to Liverpool in under 22 days or the return trip to New York (which took longer because of less favorable winds) in under 35 days would be rewarded with a new coat and a dress for his wife, courtesy of Thompson. Competition with the Black Ball Line soon developed, and the passenger cabins became elegant as different lines competed for business. Shipwrights along New York’s East River changed the construction of new ships so they could make the voyage even more quickly than the original schedule. But most important, the Black Ball Line’s ships and its many competitors that emerged in the 1820s and 1830s ensured a steady supply of cotton for English mills and steady profits to U.S. cotton growers.
New York was also the place in the United States to raise money. From the time Alexander Hamilton established the first Bank of the United States in New York City in 1791, some New Yorkers grew rich financing commercial activities that were far away from the city itself. Many farmers had long needed to borrow money for seed and fertilizer to plant a crop. After industrialists like Francis Cabot Lowell began creating giant new corporations to build the factories for producing the cotton cloth that launched the industrial revolution, they too needed ways to borrow much larger amounts of money as well as longer periods of time to make profits and pay off the loans. Without such financing, the Industrial Revolution would never have happened. Financial brokers had agreed to work together in New York in 1792, and the New
9.1
Chapter 9 New Industries New Politics 251
York Stock Exchange was founded in 1817, to support this large-scale commerce by allowing investors to pool funds and create new industries as well as commercial enterprises that were larger than any one person, even a rich one, could fund alone.
New York was also home to many banks, investment houses, and insurance companies that helped finance the cotton industry. Nautilus Insurance Company wrote over 300 life insurance policies on slaves, which protected the investments of plantation owners even if those policies did nothing for the slaves themselves. The investment house that became Brown Brothers, Harriman loaned millions of dollars to southern growers to finance the planting and shipping of cotton as well as the buying of slaves. At one point, the company owned three plantations and 346 slaves in Louisiana when owners defaulted on their loans. In general, however, New York financiers made their profits in trade and commerce and kept their distance from the institution of slavery and the risks of cotton growing. Jeremiah Thompson of the Black Ball Line made his fortune transporting slave-grown cotton, though as a Quaker, he opposed slavery itself.
The extraordinary growth of cotton production in the South, the shipment of cotton within and beyond the United States, and the seemingly insatiable European demand for cotton cloth resulted in a rapid growth of the industry. In 1800, Great Britain imported 56 million pounds of raw cotton, 16 percent from the United States and most of the rest from India. After an economic downturn that disrupted the entire industry and more, production once again began to pick up, and by 1830, Britain imported 264 million pounds of cotton, 77 percent from the United States, and by 1840, 592 million pounds, 81 percent from the United States. Once again, the demand seemed endless, but many were now a bit wiser.
With the development of the trans-Atlantic cotton trade and the opening of the Erie Canal, New York City grew rapidly in its commercial success. However, especially in hard times, the city was also plagued with areas of squalid poverty. Many New Yorkers lived in the most difficult conditions, especially in the notorious crime-filled Five Points neighborhood of Lower Manhattan.
252 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
The Panic of 1819
The boom in the industry was not, as it turned out, a continual progression. As more Americans invested in land or slaves to grow cotton or in the commercial activities that flowed from cotton, the optimism led them to become financially overextend. Suddenly in 1819, the growth came to a sudden if temporary halt. After 4 years of peace, Europe was growing more food, and a good harvest in 1818 meant less need for imported American grain. In addition, more raw cotton was being delivered to Liverpool than the mills could process, and new mills took time to build. The value of cotton fell from 32.5 cents a pound in October 1818 to 24 cents a pound in December. By early 1819, it was only 14 cents a pound. At that price, it was not profitable to grow cotton, to invest in land to plant more cotton, or to ship cotton either to New York or to Europe.
Unfortunately, the Bank of the United States decided to protect itself by limiting credit and calling in loans. State banks followed suit, and investors and farmers could not pay their debts. Small businesses failed, farms were foreclosed, and people across the country lost their jobs. The great migration west came to a halt, at least for the time being, and the business cycle slowed dangerously. At the time, no one knew when or indeed if, prosperity would return. A national economy was a new thing in the United States, and it was not well understood. In earlier eras, what happened to New England shipping had little impact further south, and a crisis in southern tobacco never had much impact further north. By 1819, however, the nation’s economy was interconnected as never before and, as a result, a widespread depression affected all Americans. The boom-and-bust cycle of this young industrial economy was also new, and people were shocked. Eventually, the economy and the country recovered, but it took years and much hardship. In the middle of that first national depression, however, Americans worried about the future. The price of cotton and the value of the cotton industry eventually rebounded and grew beyond anything imagined before the panic, but those successes would be at least partly tempered by what had happened.
| 9J| Quick Review Why did cotton come to be known as King Cotton in the early 1800s?
COMMERCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND TRANSPORTATION__________________________________
Analyze the technological and financial changes that led to the emergence of a new market economy in the United States.
9.2
i 5,1
9.2
i
While cotton was the prime factor in the growth of the U.S. economy after 1815, it was not the only one. North American wheat and corn had been feeding Britain and continental Europe long before North American cotton began to clothe them. Trees from North American forests provided wood for ships and buildings on both sides of the Atlantic. North American furs remained in demand as they had been before the American Revolution. And as more Americans moved further into the interior, improvements in internal transportation became essential for the country’s commercial development.
The Erie Canal
The Hudson River offered easy north-south connections between New Yorkers in Manhattan and Brooklyn and farmers along the river valley up to Albany and beyond, but the heartland of New York State, far to the west of the Hudson, was isolated. The Mohawk River had never been navigable, and rural roads were in terrible shape. The treaties with the Iroquois after the American Revolution opened up tens of thousands of acres, many of them rich lands that white farmers could settle, but these farmers faced terrible isolation and difficulty in selling their crops. Beginning in the 1790s, many New Yorkers wanted a way to ease transport across the state, but no
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 253
9.1
9.2
93
Erie Canal
Completed in 1825, the canal linked the Hudson River with the Great Lakes and gave farmers all along its route new ways to be part of a global economic system of trade.
easy approach seemed possible. Indeed, Americans throughout the rest of the growing country had similar needs—and a similar lack of know-how.
After Congress refused to fund a canal linking rural upstate New York with the Hudson Valley, former New York City Mayor DeWitt Clinton ran for governor in 1816 with a promise to build a canal using state funds. The canal that Clinton proposed avoided the hard-to-navigate Mohawk River and Lake Ontario (using the lake would have lowered construction costs but risked diverting trade to Canada). Instead, he proposed a canal that would follow an old Mohawk Indian trading route (the governor knew his New York history) and run from the Hudson Valley directly to Buffalo on Lake Erie. Such a canal would give farmers along its route a link to markets and would connect all of New York state to the growing Ohio region and eventually to the Mississippi River. It would make New York City the commercial capital of the nation.
The plan called for an unimaginable engineering feat. Thomas Jefferson called it “madness.” The canal needed a series of locks to raise and lower water to accommodate changes in elevation of 565 feet. The United States had few engineers, and no one really knew how to build such locks. The longest canal in the country at that time was only 26 miles, less than one-tenth of the projected plan. None of those problems discouraged Clinton or the canal’s backers. When the anti-Clinton faction, led by Martin Van Buren, realized how much enthusiasm there was for the canal, they ended their opposition, and the project quickly moved through the state legislature.
At dawn on July 4, 1817, a gala ground-breaking celebration was held at Rome, New York, when the symbolic first shovel of dirt was dug to build the Erie Canal, a manmade waterway that would extend 363 miles between Albany and Buffalo and contain a total of 83 locks. Clinton was a wily politician. He made sure that many different
The Erie Canai crossed rural New York State, connecting villages all along the way. Travelers needed to keep their heads down when traveling under bridges and wait as locks raised and lowered boats, but the canal boats provided transport at a speed unimagined before it was built.
254 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
contractors got a piece of the action digging the canal. He built political support by ensuring that up to three-quarters of the 9,000 men who did the actual digging were Dutch or English farmers and laborers from New York State and future Clinton voters. As soon as the section near Rome was completed, Clinton used the revenue it generated to cover the interest on the $7 million in bonds that had been floated to pay for the canal, reducing the cost to taxpayers.
Clinton found contractors willing to experiment with new approaches to construction. In one section, near the town of Lockport, locks needed to be constructed to raise and lower the boats over changing elevations. Contractors used gunpowder to blast out the rock, and horses hauled away the debris. By 1825, the canal, four-feet deep and 40-feet wide, was completed. Governor Clinton traveled from Buffalo across the state on the canal and then down the Hudson to mark the official opening by pouring water from Lake Erie into New York Harbor.
Many admired the engineering of the canal and many more enjoyed its economic impact. Goods and exports that had cost $100 a ton to ship from Lake Erie to New York City before the canal now shipped for $9, or even $3, a ton. Farmers in distant upstate New York and in Ohio could get their wheat to international markets through New York Harbor. Formerly isolated farm families could now send letters and even visit friends and relatives. They could also import goods that had earlier been unimaginable luxuries because they had been too heavy or perishable to transport. A newspaper in Batavia, New York, celebrated the arrival of “Oysters! Beautiful Oysters,” from Long Island to a town where fresh seafood had never been available. Farmers and small town residents now could not only eat sea food but also buy a clock for their wall, a mattress for their bed, or curtains for their home at a fraction of the price these goods had cost before the canal opened. By the 1830s, the Erie Canal carried more than twice the freight of the Mississippi River, and Rochester, Syracuse, and Buffalo boomed. Where cotton had made New York City the nation’s commercial center, foodstuffs and other products from upstate New York and even western Pennsylvania and Ohio now cemented the city’s role as the place where the nation’s trade, commerce, and finance met. Other shorter canals were built in many other parts of the country, but none had the commercial impact of the Erie Canal.
Steamboats, Roads, Travel, and News
Erie Canal boats were pulled by horses walking along the bank. The packet ships that crossed the Atlantic were powered by sail as ships had been for thousands of years. But the invention of the steamboat revolutionized water transportation. In 1807, Robert Fulton built the first commercially successful steamboat, the Clermont, which significantly cut the travel time from New York to Albany. Within 2 decades, New York Harbor and adjacent areas had become a hive of steamboat activity for both commerce and passengers, and many steamboat lines competed for the trade, none more successfully than the line Cornelius Vanderbilt owned.
Steamboats also transformed trade on the Mississippi River. In the early 1800s, farmers floated down the river on large riverboats with their goods and then sold the boats for lumber when they reached their destination and walked or rode horses home. Steamboats, however, could travel up the river against the current. In 1817, a steamer went from New Orleans to Louisville, Kentucky, in 25 days, an unheard-of speed. In less than a decade, the travel time had been cut to 8 days as faster boats competed for the Mississippi River business and became a colorful part of America in the 1800s (see Map 9-4).
In certain areas, water transport was the fastest and easiest way to travel through and around the United States, but roads were also important. In 1802, Congress authorized the use of funds from the sale of government lands in Ohio to build a gravel road to the interior of the country. Beginning in 1811, at Cumberland, Maryland, the National Road was built across the Appalachian Mountains. When it reached its original terminus at Wheeling, Virginia (after the Civil War, West Virginia), in 1818, it
9.1
9.2
93
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 255
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Charleston & Hamburg Railroad
St. Augustine
Canals, 1830
Navigable waterways, 1830 Roads, 1830 Railroads, 1850
MAP 9-4 Canals and Road in the United States. Although the Erie Cana, was without question the most important canal in the nation, a huge network of canals, dirt and gravel roads, and later, railroads connecting to rivers and ocean ports, connected inland areas to world markets.
Westernjtailroad Bostonw Worcester Railroad
Portland
well Boston (Ster
Providence Boston
New Haven Road
Delaware & Hudson Canal f^New York
^ter----Lancaster Turnpike
Baltimore
Baltimore Turnpike 'ashi^igton, D.C.
Chesapeake & Ohio Canal
not only had crossed the mountains but also had linked the Potomac River with the Ohio River, which flowed into the Mississippi, and from there to the Gulf of Mexico. Later, slowly, the National Road was extended across Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, connecting to the Mississippi River itself. While many, notably Jefferson’s Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, argued for more federally financed construction, Presidents Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe—all three advocates of a small federal government—doubted whether the national government could finance such undertakings without an amendment to the Constitution. Those three were also Virginians, and Virginia, with a long coastline, benefited more from coastal shipping than from canals or roads. On occasion, they put their doubts aside and signed bills providing
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
federal funding for specific projects, but none of those who lived in the White House between 1801 and 1825 were enthusiastic about federal support for a transportation infrastructure for the nation.
In addition, states built their own roads, like the Lancaster Turnpike across Pennsylvania, but travel by road was slow and expensive throughout the 1820s and 1830s. A stagecoach could travel 6-8 miles an hour on a good road—11 on the best road between New York and Philadelphia. Wagons could haul goods as far as the next river or canal. Tollbooths collected fees to pay for the roads, but on a poor road in the wilderness, it was easy to detour around the tollbooth. Until railroads arrived in the 1840s, proximity to a canal, river, or the Atlantic and Gulf coasts was essential for the productive commerce in goods and services. People who lived near land or water routes for transport were able to get their goods to market, receive newspapers, and stay connected to an increasingly national economy and culture. Those who lived farther away from such transportation lived isolated lives—all the more isolated as others became more connected.
With increased speed in travel, news also moved more quickly (see Table 9-1). Packet ships from Liverpool brought European news, and as the ships cut trans-Atlan-tic travel time from 50 days in 1816 to 42 days in the 1820s, that news traveled faster. Within the United States, by 1817, a man on a horse could bring news from New York to Philadelphia or Boston in 2 days. A steamboat traveling through Long Island Sound could also bring the news to coastal cities in Connecticut and to Boston in about the same amount of time. For southern coastal cities, the travel time was slower, and for inland towns, much slower. Newspapers sprang up across the country, and the federal government developed an extensive post office system (since the Constitution clearly sanctioned the post office and post roads) that helped Americans connect for personal and business matters. The packet ships, stagecoaches, and canal boats also depended on contracts with the federal post office to make their routes profitable. Commercial leaders and traders on the New York Stock Exchange were anxious to have the latest news, especially about crops, but also about European and American demand for goods. They supported the post office and newspapers as essential for the growing, unified market economy.

While steamships like Robert Fulton's Clermont made for easy and fast travel up the Hudson River and along other riversaround the nation they were limited to water transport, while stage coaches, which were much slower, were essential for travel over the country's poorly constructed roads until replaced on many routes by ra.lroads..
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 257
i
i
I
tJ
9.2
TABLE 9-1 Changes in Travel Times Within the United States as a Result of the Revolution in Transportation
Route	1800	1830 ____________I860
New York to Philadelphia	2 days	1 day	Less than 1 day
New York to South Carolina	More than 1 week	5 days	2 days
New York to Illinois	6 weeks	3 weeks	2 days
New York to New Orleans	4 weeks	2 weeks	6 days
New York to Florida	2 to 3 weeks	1 to 2 weeks	3 days
New York to Ohio	2 to 3 weeks	1 week	2 days
Banks, Corporations, and Finance
In the early years of the Republic many Americans harbored deep distrust of large business enterprises. The family farm was the business model with which most people were familiar, and other businesses were expected to be small, individual or family ventures. People might join together to finance a voyage or a project, but these efforts were short-term partnerships. At the time of the American Revolution, there were only seven American corporations, each chartered by colonial legislatures. State legislatures chartered 40 more corporations in the 1780s and some 300 in the 1790s, but gaining a corporate charter remained difficult. In general, such charters were given only to colleges or other nonprofit agencies to serve the public good. Commerce was considered as being for individual gain and therefore not something worthy of a state charter.
Some of the first corporations were banks. Congress had chartered the nation’s first bank, the Bank of North America, at Hamilton’s urging in 1781. By 1815, the United States had 200 state-chartered banks. Banks offered two essential services. First, they printed paper currency—bank notes—that were backed by the bank’s gold and silver deposits (known as specie), making commercial transactions much easier than hauling actual gold and silver around. Second, banks also made loans and collected interest, making funds available to people who wanted to develop a new enterprise and making the banks themselves profitable investments. Soon, banks also began to issue bank notes not only on the species they held but also on the loans in their portfolio. This development made banking more risky but expanded the amount of money in circulation and the credit available, essential elements in the growth of a commercial republic.
As commerce developed, however, larger commercial and industrial ventures, like the mills at Lowell, were too large and risky to be financed solely by individuals, even if those individuals could secure large bank loans. A new idea, that of a corporation as a free-standing commercial venture with multiple stockholders, took hold slowly. Two key elements in a corporation—limited liability for individual stockholders and the corporation’s freedom from having its charter withdrawn or altered by the government—were new in the United States. Individually owned businesses came and went, but corporations with their many stockholders and secure charters eventually became a permanent and important feature of American economic life after 1815.
The Reality of the New Market Economy
In 1819, Washington Irving, already a well-known author, published Rip Van Winkle. The story has entertained generations of readers, but it captured the changes in the United States in the first decades of independence. In the story, Rip, a lazy fellow living in New York’s Catskill Mountains, takes a nap in the woods on a fine fall day. He awakes 20 years later and finds everything has changed in his home village-
258 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
The picture on the sign over the inn was of someone named “General Washington” instead of King George III, but even more surprising, the whole town was different:
The very village was altered; it was larger and more populous. There were rows of houses which he had never seen before, and those which had been his familiar haunts had disappeared....The very character of the people seemed changed. There was a busy, bustling, disputatious tone about it, instead of the accustomed phlegm and drowsy tranquility.
Rip had been a passive subject of King George III. When he awoke, he was a citizen in an independent country that took politics, voting, and political parties very seriously. When he was asked whether he “was Federal or Democrat,” Rip was equally at a loss. But Irving was saying something more about the decades after the Revolution—that “the very character of the people seemed changed.” Where once rural America had moved to a relaxed, slow pace, the whole country was now a more unified commercial enterprise in which a “busy, bustling, disputatious tone” was the norm because people needed to work and work fast.
There were many real-life Rip Van Winkles who, while not necessarily having the benefit of a 20-year nap, still came to live in an adult world utterly different from that of their youth. Ichabod Washburn was born in the small town of Kingston, Massachusetts, in 1798. His widowed mother supported the family with a loom in her home. When his mother could not feed her whole family, Washburn was “put out” to work as a harness maker and told that a boy should not ask too many questions about the world around him. Later, he found work in one of the factories that were springing up around New England and then founded his own business. Washburn & Moen Wire Manufactory became the largest wire maker in the country, sending its products all over the world and making Washburn a rich man. Not all Americans became as rich as Washburn, but many people in many parts of the land moved from isolated family businesses to work in large nationally and internationally connected industries. Ihey went from a slow-paced world of barter to a cash economy based on trade, and they moved from rural isolation to participate in the exchange of information within a much larger world.
9.2
i
: i
]
growing economy and the revolution in transportation only increased dennand for the nations raw materials such as lumber, which new machinery made easy to cut into standard-sized boards for shipment sn(l use in building houses and ships.
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 259
Before the American Revolution, most farmers lived in a barter economy in which most goods and services were simply traded. In that economy, life moved at a slow and predictable pace, and little money was transacted. By the 1820s, the barter economy had disappeared in all but the most remote areas. Farmers sold their goods on the world market and used the cash they received to purchase not only necessities but also, often, luxuries that their pre-Revolutionary forbearers never imagined.
To many Americans—not just to national leaders—distances seemed shorter, money more important, and politics more omnipresent after 1815 than one would have thought possible even a few years before. Visitors to remote farm settlements in Illinois in the 1820s found that cloth coats and calico dresses purchased from a trader or a store were replacing homespun and buckskin. Once one family made the shift, everyone in the village felt pressure to earn enough money to keep up. As people worked harder and longer, public clocks—with an added hand that noted minutes, not just the passage of the hours—became more prominent. Chauncey Jerome’s Connecticut clock company made a fortune manufacturing and shipping clocks to every part of the nation. As one 1840 traveler reported, “In every dell of Arkansas, and in cabins where there was not a chair to sit on, there was sure to be a Connecticut clock.” Rip Van Winkle was not the only one waking up in a different time and in a money-conscious country.
9.2
Quick Review How did new trading routes progressively improve the U.S. economy and, in doing so, change the United States?
93
Era of Good Feelings
The period from 1817 to 1823 in which the decline of the Federalists enabled the Democratic-Republicans to govern in a spirit of seemingly nonpartisan harmony.
FROM THE ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS TO THE POLITICS OF DIVISION
Explain the political developments in the United States during the 1820s, including the shift of power toward the South and West that resulted from the changing economic situation.
James Monroe’s two terms as president from 1817 to 1825 were known as the Era of Good Feelings because of the lack of rancor in his virtually unanimous election and reelection during a time when the opposing Federalist Party had almost disappeared. The period was quite a change from the days when John Adams and Thomas Jefferson contested the presidency and Federalists and Democratic-Republicans fought in the press and on the floor of Congress. But even during the Era of Good Feelings, all was not calm on the political front. The Supreme Court was rapidly expanding its reach and the reach of the federal government into new aspects of the country. In addition, political tensions over the cotton economy, territorial expansion, and slavery exploded with surprising force in the 1820s. The good feelings were not destined to last.
The Supreme Court Defines Its Place
John Marshall served as chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1801 to 1835. Throughout his long tenure on the Court, Marshall was usually able to convince a majority of the justices to go along with his views no matter what their prior political beliefs were. He used his position to define the role of the court as arbiter of the Constitution, and he expanded the role and power of the federal government in many aspects of national life.
Early in his tenure, Marshall’s 1803 Marbury v. Madison decision claimed a role for the Supreme Court in reviewing the constitutionality of acts of Congress. Marshall never again invoked that right, but in a series of subsequent decisions, he created the same right for the court in relationship to state legislatures and state courts. Two 1819 decisions from the Marshall court were especially important in expanding the role of the Supreme Court and the federal government.
160 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
In an appeal to the Supreme Court in the case of Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819), the old Federalist Marshall reviewed a decision by lower courts that began when the Democratic-Republican-dominated New Hampshire legislature revised the original charter of Dartmouth College, converting the school from a private to a state college. The Supreme Court ruled that state charters, including charters from colonial legislatures like Dartmouth’s, were contracts and that contracts, once agreed to, were inviolable; thus, the legislature’s actions were unconstitutional. The case was important not only because it asserted the right of the Supreme Court to review the actions of state legislatures, not just Congress, but also because it asserted the inviolability of contracts. As a result, it became an important bedrock of the American economic system. After the Dartmouth College decision, the nation’s growing businesses and industries were able to be certain that their contracts, once agreed to, could not be overturned by legislative action.
The other important 1819 decision was McCulloch v. Maryland. Congress had chartered the Second Bank of the United States at the end of the War of 1812 to stabilize the nation’s finances. But the bank was not popular with many people, especially farmers and others who saw it as an instrument of the commercial elite. In response to the general opposition to the bank and to charges of irregularities in the bank’s Maryland branch, the state of Maryland imposed a tax on the bank as a way to drive it out of business, or at least out of Maryland. In response, the bank brought suit in the federal courts and the case worked its way up to the Supreme Court. In the decision, written by Marshall, the court took Alexander Hamilton’s view that the “necessary and proper” clause of the Constitution meant that Congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest, despite the Tenth Amendment’s mandate that states should retain any power that was not specifically delegated to the national government in the Constitution. Marshall went further, saying that “the power to tax involves the power to destroy” while the “power to create” that Congress had invoked in the case of the bank, “implies a power to preserve.” The issue Marshall referred to was not obscure. With McCulloch v. Maryland, the Supreme Court declared that states could not interfere with the workings of the federal government.
The Marshall Court continued to expand federal authority in subsequent cases. In Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), the court ruled that the state of New York did not have a right to give Ogden, a partner of Robert Fulton, a monopoly to ferry service in New York harbor since the harbor connected New York and New Jersey and thus involved interstate commerce, which only Congress could control. Later, in Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the court ruled that the state of Georgia could not regulate private dealings by U.S. citizens within the territory controlled by the Cherokee tribe since tribes had their own sovereign rights, subject only to the authority of the federal government. In these and other decisions, the court affirmed what came to be known as a “loose construction” of the Constitution, which as Marshall explained, enabled the Constitution “to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs to preserve its relevance through time. Not everyone agreed with Marshall s perspective, and when he died in 1835, a Democratic-Republican paper did not mourn “the political doctrines” of a justice who sought “to strengthen government at the expense of the People.” Nevertheless, many felt that both the Constitution and the rights of people were stronger for his efforts.
The Politics of Cotton and the Missouri Compromise of 1820
Although Missouri was too far north to be a cotton-growing state, its population also grew as a result of Americas westward movement, and by 1819 Missouri applied to Congress to be admitted as a new state. A bill to authorize a state constitutional convention was introduced in Congress with little fanfare early in 1819. However, Congressman James Tallmadge, Jr., of New York introduced an amendment to the
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 261
Missouri statehood bill to prohibit the introduction of new slaves into the state and gradually free those who were already there. Tallmadge’s amendment created a huge crisis in which southern representatives and senators attacked it and its author.
In language that prefigured the heated debates of the next four decades, Georgia Representative Thomas W. Cobb told Tallmadge, “You have kindled a fire which all the waters of the ocean cannot put out, which seas of blood can only extinguish.” Tallmadge responded in kind: “If a dissolution of the Union must take place, let it be so! If civil war, which gentlemen so much threaten, must come, I can only say, let it come.” Threats of disunion were as old as the Constitutional Convention of 1787, but this language was harsher than Congress had heard in a long time. The reasons were clear.
When the Constitution was adopted, many from both the South and the North believed that slavery was dying; even its defenders tended to describe the institution as a sad though necessary evil. When George Washington and others of his generation freed their slaves, the economic impact was limited since slaves were not of great value. But that period was before cotton transformed the economics of slavery. A slave in the prime of life who might be sold for $400 or $500 in 1814 could be sold for $800-$1,100 in 1819, and though the price of slaves, as of land, decreased with the panic of 1819, values in both cases recovered and then kept rising. Slaves had become valuable, whether as workers or as “products” to be sold. If Virginia and Carolina planters could not use all the slaves they owned, instead of freeing them, they could now sell them to cotton growers in Georgia, Mississippi, and Alabama at a substantial profit. Missouri had few slaves, but by 1820, slave owners were not about to allow an attack on the institution of slavery. Although much of the debate about Missouri was spoken in the language of popular will and the sovereign right of (white) people there to decide their own policies, it took place as economic and racial realities were changing quickly.
In the North, hostility to slavery was growing. Many northerners, including many whose pre-Revolutionary parents and grandparents had owned slaves, now hated the whole idea of human slavery and disliked a constitutional system that protected it. Even before 1820, some people were starting to call themselves abolitionists—those committed to completely ending slavery. Many other northerners had more strategic objections to the constitutional protection of slavery. Ihe three-fifths clause in the Constitution gave the slaveholding South 17 more seats in the House of Representatives and, thus, 17 more electoral votes in presidential elections than an allocation of representatives based on only free people would have done. As a result, four of the five U.S. presidents who had served by 1820 had come from Virginia. Ihe nation was becoming divided between a commercial North and an agricultural South, and although neither region was purely for or against slavery, the fact that slavery gave the South a political edge came across to many northerners as being unfair.
The debates about Missouri, despite all the anger voiced by Tallmadge and Cobb, were not as vitriolic as future debates would be. There were not yet many radical abolitionists in the North, and so far, few in the South were saying that slavery was a positive good. But already in 1819, neither side would back down, and Congress adjourned without doing anything about Missouri.
Before Congress reassembled in 1820, President Monroe and Henry Clay of Kentucky, the speaker of the House of Representatives, designed a compromise to resolve the issue. While the North had a solid and growing majority in the House, the Senate was evenly divided between slave and free states. Since each state had two senators no matter what its population, 11 free states and 11 slave states meant a Senate that was split 22-22 on the issue of slavery. In addition, while Congress had debated what to do about Missouri, the region known as the District of Maine, within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, was also petitioning for statehood with the blessing of the Massachusetts legislature. The compromise proposed that if Maine and Missouri were admitted at the same time, and if Missouri was allowed to be a slave state, then the balance in the Senate would be maintained. However, this proposed compromise
IV
Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848 would also restrict the spread of slavery: while Missouri would be admitted as a slave state, all other states north of the 36° 30° north parallel, that is, the southern border of Missouri, would be admitted as free states. Although most northerners in the House and Senate voted against it, some supported the compromise, as did almost all of those from the South, and the Missouri Compromise passed Congress, allowing Missouri and Maine to be admitted to the Union. The crisis had been averted. The success would be the first of many such compromises for which Henry Clay would become known as the “great compromiser” over the next 3 decades. However, the need for this compromise signaled more clearly than ever before that slavery had become a divisive issue that would not go away (see Map 9-5).
The Contested Election of 1824
As President Monroe came to the end of his second term, the political good will that had marked his tenure disappeared. Although no constitutional limitation had yet been set on presidential terms, Washington had set a precedent for stepping down after two terms, which others had followed. In 1824, as the nation sought a new president,
Missouri Compromise
A compromise in Congress in 1820 that admitted Missouri to the Union as a slave state and Maine as a free state as well as prohibited slavery in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase territory above 36°30° north latitude.
9.3
i
Los
Angeles
RUSSIAN
TERRITORY
BRITISH
NORTH AMERICA
OREGON COUNTRY (US
and Great Britain) SPANISH
TERRITORY
Missouri ft
MICHIGAN /
UNORGANIZED
TERRITORY
Xjy.TERRITORY
; MICHIGAN
\ TERRITORY
:ar>sas R.
ILLINOIS ^St. Louis
OHIO
Ohio*
PACIFIC
OCEAN
---------------------1
ARKANSAS TERRITORY
(1819-36)	< ~	<
tied R. 7
_, j u hatchez § Nacogdoches \	• $
San Antonio de Bejar
KENTUCKY
TENNESSEE
v? ALABAMA
|	| Free states and territories
|	| Slave states and territories
Open to slavery by Missouri Compromise |	| Closed to slavery by Missouri Compromise
— — Missouri Compromise Line
VIRGINIA
PENNSYLVANIA
Washington
D.C.
NEW HAMPSHIRE
MASSACHUSETTS
RHODE ISLAND
CONNECTICUT NEW JERSEY DELAWARE
MARYLAND
NORTH
CAROLINA,
SOUTH ’
CAROLINA
GEORGIA
LOuIsfc^NA,-,
Orleans
Gulf of Mexico
*St. Augustine
FLORIDA
T^RITORY
ATLANTIC
OCEAN







MAP 9-5 The Missouri Compromise Line. This map shows the way the nation was divided in an equal lumber of free and slave states by the Missouri Compromise.
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 263
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Missouri Compromise
When he heard about the Missouri Compromise, the aging Thomas Jefferson, who had been infuriated by the Tallmadge amendment because it interfered with the rights of states, wrote to John Holmes, a Massachusetts congressman:
I had for a long time ceased to read the newspapers or pay any attention to public affairs, confident they were in good hands, and content to be a passenger in our bark to the shore from which I am not distant. But this momentous question, like a fire bell in the night, awakened and filled me with terror. I considered it at once as the knell of the Union. It is hushed indeed for the moment. But this is a reprieve only, not a final sentence. A geographical line, coinciding with a marked principle, moral and political, once conceived and held up to the angry passions of men, will never be obliterated; and every new irritation will mark it deeper and deeper.
While Clay was being hailed as a national hero for crafting the compromise, Jefferson, perhaps, had a better sense of what lay
ahead. The former president and slaveholder who also wrote passionately against slavery knew that, in the long term, no issue would so greatly divide the nation's citizens, and as he grew old, he saw the division become increasingly intense.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
How would you characterize pro- and antislavery forces in 1820? What might explain the widespread belief that the issue of slavery had been resolved with the passage of the Missouri Compromise?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In hindsight, it is clear that Jefferson was correct and the Missouri Compromise was only a "reprieve." What evidence was available in 1820 to support Jefferson's point of view? What trends had already begun to emerge that would lead the intensification of the conflict over slavery in the decades to come?
mi
the United States experienced one of the most contested and confusing presidential elections in its history. For citizens of a nation that had elected James Monroe almost unanimously in 1816 and 1820, the ill will of 1824 was a surprise.
In one sense, the election of 1824 proceeded just as the writers of the Constitution— who hated the idea of political parties—envisioned: a contest in which members of the House, with each state’s delegation having one vote, would decide on a president from among several of the nation’s leading citizens who had been identified by the votes of the Electoral College. With the demise of the Federalists, the Democratic-Republican Party was the only party in the nation. It had been as that party’s candidate that Monroe had been elected by an almost unanimous vote since the Federalists did not nominate a candidate in 1820 or anytime after that.
By 1824, however, the usual process in which a party caucus within Congress would select a presidential nominee had broken down, and three members of Monroe’s cabinet along with the speaker of the House of Representatives all sought the presidency. A fifth candidate from the same Democratic-Republican Party, Senator Andrew Jackson, the national war hero from Tennessee, also joined the race. In this type of contest, personal animosity and political intrigue were inevitable.
At first, many thought Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford of Georgia was the obvious choice. Crawford had stepped out of the way to support Monroe s election, and he and many of his supporters thought it was now his turn. The congressional caucus that traditionally nominated presidential candidates, in fact, did choose Crawford. However, in what was clearly a warning of trouble to come, less than a fourth of the members of Congress showed up to vote in the caucus. Others, in Congress and outside of it, would find other candidates and other ways to support them.
Secretary of State John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts had a good claim to consideration. Many considered the office of secretary of state as the natural stepping stone to the presidency. Monroe had been Madison’s secretary of state as Madison had been
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Jefferson s, and Jefferson had been Washington’s. In addition, Adams had served the nation well. He had acquired Florida for the United States, arranged treaties that opened vast new lands to settlement, and handled South American revolutions and potential European interference skillfully. As a former ambassador, senator, son of a former president, and favorite of the antislavery North, Adams had much going for him.
Secretary of War John C. Calhoun from South Carolina was another candidate. Calhoun had not yet become the fierce advocate of states’ rights that he was later. In 1824, he was a strong nationalist. He advocated for a strong army and for using army engineers to conduct a national survey that would lead to federally supported roads, bridges, and canals connecting all parts of the nation. He also supported the Bank of the United States. Calhoun initially backed Adams, but when he became convinced after the Missouri crisis that southern and border state electors would never support a New Englander, his own ambition was fired up and he campaigned actively.
Henry Clay of Kentucky, also a contender, was speaker of the House of Representatives and an ardent nationalist. Like Calhoun, he supported an expansive federal government that controlled the currency through a strong national bank and that built roads and bridges as well as supported commerce. From his political base in Kentucky, Clay hoped to be the first president from west of the Alleghenies. He was also shrewd enough to guess that with so many candidates in the race, the House of Representatives, which he controlled, might make the final decision.
Finally, there was Andrew Jackson of Tennessee. At first, Jackson seemed an unlikely candidate for president. Unlike any president after Washington, Jackson had never served in the cabinet or represented the nation abroad. Instead, he was the hero of the Battle of New Orleans. He had served for 1 year in the Senate and in other government posts, but his primary public role was as a military leader, and in the 1820s, the military was not always a popular institution. His wife, Rachel Jackson, strongly opposed his seeking the presidency. In 1822, however, the Tennessee legislature formally nominated Jackson as a candidate for president, primarily as a way to block the then frontrunner Crawford. At that point, Jackson probably supported Adams, in part, because Adams had supported Jackson’s actions in Florida, while Crawford and Clay had not.
No one, including Jackson, counted on how popular he would be with the electorate. When a tavern keeper in Pennsylvania wrote, asking whether Jackson would indeed seek the presidency, the canny general, knowing that his response would be published, replied that it was his “undeviating rule neither to seek or decline public invitations to office.” His response seemed the height of statesmanship to a country that had seen Monroe’s almost unanimous election in the Era of Good Feelings replaced by a divisive contest for the presidency.
The Constitution allows each state to decide how to choose presidential electors. By 1824, most states allowed voters to select electors pledged to a specific candidate, thus greatly democratizing the presidential selection process. That electorate had changed since the Constitution was adopted in 1789. Since 1808 when New Jersey retracted its decision to give women the right to vote, only men voted. Property restrictions on voting, still common when Washington was elected, were long gone in most states, so nearly all white men could now vote, and in some northern states, so could free black men. In New York City, free blacks sometimes held the balance of power among various factions. Excluded from voting were women of all races, most blacks including all slaves, and Indians. Nevertheless, this broad male electorate valued widespread popularity as more important in selecting a president than the voice of a few members of the social and economic elite. By 1824, the (white male) popular will was coalescing behind Jackson far more than anyone expected.
In a nation increasingly divided by sectional issues, a nationally respected war hero had great appeal. In addition, a fierce opponent of banks like Jackson was popular with many people who were convinced at least partially rightly that the Bank of the United States had brought on the panic of 1819. In places like Mississippi
9.3
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 265
9.3
1	and Alabama where some people were growing rich on farmlands that Jackson had
J	wrested from their Indian owners, he was a local hero. Particularly in a country where
an elite’s economic decisions had hurt many farmers and workers, a candidate who had been born in a log cabin and grown up poor, though he had become wealthy as an adult, had deep appeal. Popular appeal had not been a major factor in the elections of Madison and Monroe, but it was the factor in 1824.
In the 1824 election, Jackson won the popular vote. Calhoun, who had withdrawn from the campaign after deciding that Jackson was too popular to beat, was easily elected as vice president since the Twelfth Amendment, ratified in 1804 in the after-math of the Jefferson-Burr fiasco, mandated that presidential electors cast separate ballots for presidential and vice presidential candidates. In addition to Pennsylvania, Jackson easily carried the black-belt states of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana as well as most of the rest of the South, a region benefitting from its population of nonvoting slaves, which strengthened its electoral votes as a result of the three-fifths clause to the Constitution. Jackson defeated Adams in New Jersey, Crawford in North Carolina, and Clay in Indiana and Illinois. Adams carried New England, some of the mid-Atlantic region, and the Northwest. However, although Jackson won the most popular votes, no one had the 131 electoral votes needed for a majority:
Jackson	99	electoral	votes
Adams	84	electoral	votes
Crawford	41 electoral votes
Clay	37	electoral	votes
Clay’s prediction was right; the election had been tossed into the House of Representatives. Not since 1800 had the House of Representatives been called on to decide the outcome of a presidential contest.
Ironically, however, since the Constitution required the House to choose from among the top three candidates, Clay himself had been eliminated. Moreover, although his supporters had kept it hidden, Crawford had had a stroke and could not possibly assume the presidency. So the election came down to Jackson and Adams, and Adams was determined to fight for the office, despite ranking second in the popular and electoral votes. The Constitution mandated a process, and Adams wanted to follow it. Many of Adams’s followers, and the supporters of other candidates, saw Jackson as a would-be American Napoleon who would undermine American democracy. No one held that concern more strongly than Henry Clay—who was master of the House and determined that Jackson should not be president. When the House met on February 9, 1825, Adams was elected president by a vote of 13 states, with seven states for Jackson and four for Crawford.
On the evening of the vote, outgoing President Monroe held a party at the White House. Jackson approached Adams, and they greeted each other with considerable formality. Observers thought Jackson was “genial and gracious,” while Adams was stiff, rigid, cold as a statue. The two would not often meet again, but the interaction that night imprinted an image on the public that would follow them, to Jackson’s benefit, for the next 4 years and beyond.
Whether Adams had made any secret agreement with Clay will never be known. But 5 days after the vote, Adams appointed Clay to be his secretary of state and thus his successor if the previous pattern held true. Jackson denounced both men for making a “corrupt bargain,” resigned from the Senate, and returned to his home in Nashville to begin what was essentially a 4-year campaign against Adams, Clay, and their administration, as well as a campaign for his own election to the office that he and his followers believed he had won in 1824. Adams and Clay had underestimated the popular feeling for Jackson. The animosity of the campaign and Jackson’s rancor would make the next 4 years difficult for an administration led by two of the nation s most gifted political and diplomatic leaders.
266 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
The Adams-Clay Agenda
In his inaugural address in March 1825, Adams acknowledged that he came to the presidency, less possessed of your confidence in advance than any of my predecessors.” Nevertheless, it was his goal to unify the nation and improve all parts of the country. He was the last president to believe that the “baneful weed of party strife” might be avoided, and he struggled—unsuccessfully—to avoid the creation of political parties and permanent national divisions.
Adams proposed a list of national improvements to be implemented by the federal government. Support for federally funded improvements such as roads, canals, and so on would be a hallmark of the Adams administration. An emerging political faction that supported national development and strong federal actions to deal with national problems agreed with the direction that the Adams administration was taking. Jackson and another emerging faction would strongly oppose this sort of activist federal government, advocating instead for states’ rights.
Improvement, both personal and political, was a popular ambition in the 1820s. Adams worried about becoming a better person, and he swam naked in the Potomac every day to improve his body. But he also wanted to improve the country, and he saw the money freed from paying off the Revolutionary War debt and the income from sales of federal lands as the perfect opportunity for investing in the country. The General Survey, conducted by army engineers when John C. Calhoun was secretary of war, was the blueprint. Adams, with an eye to southern voters, proposed a second National Road to link Washington, D.C., to New Orleans. He proposed, and Congress approved, building the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal that would connect with the original National Road and link the Potomac with the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers. Postmaster General John McLean built post offices in rural areas and subsidized the stagecoach industry to carry the mail and connect the nation’s far-flung people to one another. Adams also proposed a new national university to be based in Washington and a national observatory—a “lighthouse of the skies.” All of these activities were designed to knit the nation together, advancing knowledge and making it easier to transport goods. In addition, the intent was to unite the nation in a single political entity and a market economy, especially after the divisions sparked by the debates around the Missouri Compromise (see Map 9-4 on page 256).
Secretary of State Clay was involved in all these efforts and, in fact, during the presidential campaign, had described a program of internal improvements and protective tariffs that came to be known as the “American System.” In Clay’s mind, the American System would reduce poverty by linking all Americans (all white Americans; Clay considered neither his own 50 slaves nor others’ slaves to be Americans) in a prosperous commercial community. The system was American because it made the federal government an agent of economic development. Clay believed that the roads and canals, as well as the support of interstate commerce that he and Adams wanted to foster on a federal level, would make a stronger and more united America, commercially, geographically, and socially. Ultimately, Clay wanted transportation and commerce to bridge traditional sectional divides and create a thriving commercial nation that was united by common national investments. Moreover, the system was potentially a way to protect the country by building an infrastructure that could serve military needs, allowing troops to move quickly from one part of the country to another when necessary. Finally, the American System would protect infant American industries through a strong tariff that would allow them to develop and thus reduce American dependence on cheaper foreign imports.
In one of his last acts as speaker in 1824, Clay led an effort to increase the average tariff from 20 percent to 35 percent. The new higher tariff made him a hero to New England mill owners and their workers whose jobs it protected. It was also popular in commercial centers like Cincinnati, Ohio, and Clay’s hometown of Lexington, Kentucky, where new industries needed protection. But the improvements and tariffs
93
American System
The program of government subsidies to improve roads and canals and to foster economic growth and protect domestic manufacturers from foreign competition.
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 267
1
This stylized picture of Andrew Jackson speaking to a crowd begins to suggest the enormous popularity that the former war hero had as he connected with diverse audiences of voters in a way no leader since George Washington had done.
of the American System were not popular in other parts of the country. A high tariff raised the cost of everything southern cotton planters had to buy but did nothing to raise the price of their cotton in the market. They saw the tariff and the president’s antislavery opinions as a sign of a federal government that was working against their economic interests, and many in the South hardened their opposition to Adams, Clay, and the American System.
As the 1828 presidential campaign built steam, Adams and Clay continued their pitch for the costs and benefits of the American System. Jackson, however, had a more focused agenda: to replace Adams, the minority president, with the man who had rightfully won in 1824. Ironically, although Adams ardently wanted to avoid the “baneful weed of party strife,” it was during his term that new American political parties were born.
The Jackson Victory of 1828 and the Rebirth of Political Parties
Whig Party
Political party that began to take shape in support of the Adams-Clay American system and was first known as the National Republicans, but became the Whig Party in the 1830s in opposition to the Jacksonian Democrats.
From the day he left Washington, D.C., in 1825, Jackson was running to become president in 1828. He believed that he and his supporters had been cheated, and he meant to be vindicated. Nevertheless, it took time for the campaign to take shape. It is easier to understand the birth of political parties in retrospect than it was at the time. Many Americans were glad to see the old Federalist Party gone; at the same time, they hated to see the Democratic-Republicans splinter. At first, the two factions in Congress were described simply as “Adams men” and “Jackson men” After the midterm Congressional elections of 1826, the “Jackson men” controlled Congress. The “Adams men” then started to call themselves National Republicans, that is, Democratic-Republicans who supported the national administration led by President Adams. This group, led primarily by Henry Clay, would become the core of the new Whig Party, the party that advocated for a strong national government role in the economy, internal improvements such as roads and canals, and social reform movements in general. The “Jackson men” continued to call themselves Democratic-Republicans, emphasizing that they were the rightful winners of the last election and represented the democratic will of the people, which had been thwarted by Adams and Clay in the 1824
268 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
election. Soon, the Jacksonians dropped the “Republicans” in their name and were simply known as Democrats, forerunners of the Democratic Party that throughout the 1800s argued for the rights of the “common man” to be left alone by centralized government and economic interests.
Neither party was fully organized in the 1828 election and though each had newspapers that were strongly on their side, other hallmarks of national political parties like national nominating conventions came later. Nevertheless, from 1828 on, most Americans expected presidential elections to be hotly contested by two or more candidates representing their respective political parties and running on specific promises. The era of electing a few wise men to select the best president was over forever.
The prime architect of Jackson’s campaign and his political agenda, besides Jackson himself who delegated little, was Senator Martin Van Buren of New York. Van Buren was a strict constructionist of the Constitution who believed that the American System advocated by Adams and Clay violated the Constitution because it involved the federal government in many matters not specifically assigned to it by the Constitution. Although a New Yorker, Van Buren was closely allied with many in the South who liked Van Buren’s commitment to a small federal government because they feared that if the federal government could involve itself in shaping the nation’s economy, it could also interfere with slavery, a threat that terrified the slaveholding class.
The campaign of 1828 was as nasty as any in American history. Newspapers took on a larger role than ever before endorsing candidates and spreading slander about the opposition. The National Republicans reminded voters of Jackson’s temper and his many brawls and duels, which they said were unpresidential, as well as the times he may have exceeded his authority in attacking Indians or executing British subjects. In addition, they attacked his marriage to Rachel Jackson. More than 30 years earlier, the Jacksons had been married before Rachel’s divorce from her first husband was final, so she was thus guilty of bigamy. The attack on their marriage infuriated Jackson and deeply hurt Rachel. When she died shortly after the election, Jackson never forgave his adversaries.
The campaign organized by Jackson and Van Buren was equally nasty. They reminded voters of the supposed “corrupt bargain” that had put Adams in the White House and claimed—with no proof—that Adams, as ambassador to Russia, had procured young American women for the Czar’s pleasure. They portrayed Adams as cold and elitist and attacked his Unitarian beliefs as un-Christian compared with Jackson’s devout Presbyterian faith. For the Democrats, the campaign was not about the American System but a choice “Between J.Q. Adams, who can write, and Andy Jackson who can fight.” The fighter won easily.
The popular vote nearly tripled between 1824 and 1828, and 57.5 percent of all eligible voters actually voted. All but two states, Delaware and South Carolina, chose presidential electors by popular vote for slates pledged to one candidate or another in 1828. Campaigning had risen to new heights, and more voters believed that their votes counted. Political parties organized a new get-out-the-vote effort, which for the first time, included election materials such as buttons, mugs, posters, and slogans. In the end, Jackson won 647,286 votes—56 percent of the popular vote—and 178 electoral votes, and Adams won 508,064 popular votes and 83 electoral votes. (Four years earlier the popular vote had been 153,554 votes for Jackson to 108,740 votes for Adams.) ^ere was no need for the House of Representatives to be involved. A new style of electioneering had emerged.
Democratic Party
Political party that favored states'rights and a limited role for the federal government, especially in economic affairs.
93
Quick Review How did the nation evolve from the Era of Good Feelings to the partisanship of the mid to late 1820s? What were the most important factors in this transition?
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 269
CONCLUSION
Washington Irving’s story, Rip Van Winkle, published in 1819, tells the story of a man who awakens after a 20-year nap to find that everything in his village has completely changed. The story captures the transformation of the physical, commercial, and political landscapes of the United States and the corresponding changes in the lives of Americans during the first decades of independence—largely caused by the rapid growth of cotton production and technological innovation. Although it would have seemed unimaginable even a few years earlier, after 1815 distances seemed shorter, money and material goods more important, and politics omnipresent to many Americans, not just national leaders. Production of cotton and all the accompanying commerce it generated changed the lives of nearly all of the country’s residents and focused the attention of many Americans on productivity and hoped-for prosperity. Slavery expanded from the Atlantic coast as thousands of enslaved people were forced to move into the interior of the country where the black belt, stretching from Georgia through Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, became the center of cotton production based on the backbreaking labor of slaves. At the same time, many white Americans, especially young women, who had been used to the rhythms of farm life, went to work in highly regimented mills, spinning cotton into cloth. Other Americans transported cotton between states and across the Atlantic Ocean at speeds their forbearers could not have imagined. The new prominence of public clocks with a hand that noted minutes in addition to the passage of hours reflected this shift. The demand for cotton and the labor-intensive process of its cultivation led to the explosion of slavery in the South, the growth of the textile industry in the North, and a revolution in industry and transportation.
New York City emerged as a transportation hub connecting the United States to the international cotton trade. The Erie Canal also secured New York’s place as a commercial center as it made transport between interior locations and coastal ports more efficient. Steamboats, canal boats, transatlantic packet ships, and stagecoaches traveled the routes in ever-faster circuits. Banks, some of the first and most important corporations in the young nation, played an essential role in the market economy. Corporate shareholders, a dramatically new development, deepened the stability of businesses and extended their ability to operate. However, the cotton market slumped in 1819, which caused an economic downturn and financial panic among Americans. Although the economy would eventually recover and thrive, the experience reflected a new and not fully understood national economy.
During Monroe’s administration, the Supreme Court, led by Chief Justice John Marshall, decided a series of cases that expanded the power of the federal government and limited that of the states, claiming a role for the Supreme Court in reviewing the constitutionality of acts of state legislatures, which would become important in the years to come. Despite general calm during the Era of Good Feelings of Monroe’s two-term administration, political tensions over the cotton economy, territorial expansion, and slavery exploded with surprising force in the 1820s. When Missouri applied to become a state in 1819, the divisions over slavery intensified, and although the Missouri Compromise was meant to resolve the differences, many agreed with the aging Thomas Jefferson that it was “a reprieve only.” The Era of Good Feelings gave way to divisive contests for the presidency in 1824—a victory for John Quincy Adams—and in 1828—a victory for Andrew Jackson—and the rebirth of political parties. Jackson’s political agenda reflected his concerns for the economic and political interests of a broad spectrum of white America that was growing in influence in the government, and he represented the symbolic voice of a new generation.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did the economic changes fostered by the growth of cotton production and the new national market economy in the United States affect national politics and governmental decisions? Why were economic and political trends so closely connected?
270 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Chapter 9 Chapter Review
9.1
CREATING THE COTTON ECONOMY______________________________
Explain the role of cotton in transforming the land and the lives of many diverse people of the United States.
Review Questions
1.	Chronological Reasoning
How did events and developments in the 1790s set the stage for the rapid expansion of cotton production in the United States in the early 1800s? What role did events taking place outside of the United States play in this process?
2.	Historical Interpretation
How did the expansion of cotton production shape the development of slavery in the United States? In what ways did it make life harder for enslaved African-Americans?
3.	Historical Interpretation
How did the expansion of cotton production shape the development of the commercial economy in the United States? What new opportunities and challenges did it create for northern workers?
COMMERCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND TRANSPORTATION
Analyze the technological and financial changes that led to the emergence of a new market economy in the United States.
Review Questions
4.	Historical Interpretation
How did the transportation revolution create new connections between Americans and alter old ones? How did it facilitate the movement and exchange of people, products, and ideas?
92
9.3
5.	Crafting Arguments
Defend or refute the following statement. “The emergence of the market economy in the early 1800s would not have been possible without significant government involvement.” What evidence can you provide to support your position?
6.	Comparison
What were the most important social, political, and economic differences between the United States in 1800 and the United States in 1820? How would you explain the changes you note?
FROM THE ERA OF GOOD FEELINGS TO THE POLITICS OF DIVISION______________________________________________
Explain the political developments in the United States during the 1820s, including the shift of power toward the South and West that resulted from the changing economic situation.
Review Questions
7.	Comparison
Why was the sectional divide over slavery deeper in 1820 than it had been in 1790?
8.	Historical Interpretation
How did Andrew Jackson’s unexpected popular success in the election of 1824 foreshadow broader changes in the nature of American politics? To whom did Jackson appeal? Why?
9.	Historical Interpretation
How did the economic policies of the Adams administration contribute to the emergence of new political parties? How was the growing sectional divide reflected in the new parties?
Chapter 9 New Industries, New Politics 271
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the changing definitions of democracy in the Age of Jackson and what Jacksonian Democracy meant for different groups of Americans.
Politics dominated the thinking of many Americans in the Age of Jackson. This painting titled Stump Speaking captures the scene as a large group of white men gathered to hear a political speaker.
This illustration of the crowd at the White House after Jackson's inauguration captures the mood of the day, even though the artist was not present and created it based on stories told by others.
Significant Dates
10.1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY, JACKSONIAN GOVERNMENT
Analyze Jackson's advocacy for Indian Removal, his opposition to the Bank of the United States, his support for a tariff, and the impact of these policies on other Americans.
DEMOCRATIZED RELIGION: THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENING___________________________
Analyze the diversity of American religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
DEMOCRATIZED EDUCATION: THE BIRTH OF THE COMMON SCHOOL
Explain the development of public education as a result of, and in response to, the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
272 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a
Andrew Jackson’s inauguration as president in March 1829 was a somber affair for Jackson himself, who was still mourning his wife Rachel’s death the previous December. He did not make the traditional call on the outgoing president, blaming John Quincy Adams for attacks that he believed hastened Rachel’s death, and he did not attend his own inaugural ball. For his supporters, however, Jackson’s inauguration was a raucous celebration of democracy. When Jackson arrived at the White House, a festive crowd overran the place, stood on the furniture, broke china, and had to be lured outside with bowls of spiked punch. A Washington observer, Margaret Bayard Smith complained about what she saw as the rabble that inundated the White House, describing their behavior as “scrambling, fighting, romping.” Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story called it “the reign of King Mob.” But order was restored, and Jacksons agenda began to emerge.
Jackson cared about a few big issues, and these shaped his agenda as president. He did not worry much about how the issues were connected. During both of his campaigns for the presidency in 1824 and 1828, he had promised to acquire land for white settlement by forcing Indian tribes to move west of the Mississippi River. He also promised to undermine the Bank of the United States and the power of northern economic elites-
National Identity, 1800-1848
He was opposed to Henry Clay’s American System and wanted to keep taxes low and the role of the federal government modest. That said, Jackson understood power and was committed to expanding the power of the presidency itself. As he proceeded with his agenda, he was often challenged, and his response was to fight back with all the resources he could find.
The era during which Jackson led the country was known as the Age of Jackson. Jackson was the symbolic voice of a new generation and a specific class of American people. The first president born west of the Alleghenies, he was not connected to the Founding Fathers as all of his predecessors had been. He spoke for the economic and political interests of a broad spectrum of white America that was growing in influence in the government. Although it was not his doing, Jackson also presided over a nation in which the churches and the schools expanded and changed significantly.
JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY, JACKSONIAN GOVERNMENT
Analyze Jackson's advocacy for Indian Removal, his opposition to the Bank of the United States, his support for a tariff, and the impact of these policies on other Americans.
Jackson knew what he wanted to accomplish as president. Before implementing any other policies, he planned a clean sweep of senior federal office holders, some of whom had served under several presidents. Jefferson’s successors—Madison, Monroe, and John Quincy Adams—had made few changes below the level of the Cabinet itself, partly because they were all from the same political party and partly because they did not see it as the president’s role to make wholesale personnel changes. In a significant change of practice, Jackson replaced many officials, and in the process, created the suspicion that there had been corruption without evidence for it. Jackson believed in what came to be called the “spoils system,” which was a patronage system in which a victorious political party rewards a candidates supporters with government jobs. Jackson used the term “rotation in office,” but his supporters believed to the victor belongs the spoils’’ Suddenly with Jackson in office, experienced officials, including 25 customs collectors and 423 postmasters, were fired from what had been a small, stable federal bureaucracy. Services deteriorated, and the quality of some federal services like the postal service did not recover until civil service reform took hold in the 1880s.
10.1
1826 Charles B. Finney leads religious revivals in western New York
1828	Tariff of Abominations;
Jackson defeats Adams for president
1829	Andrew Jackson inaugurated president
1830	Congress passes Indian Removal Act Nullification Crisis begins
Joseph Smith founds the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints
1832	Jackson vetoes recharter of Second Bank of the United States
South Carolina legislature nullifies federal tariffs
Black Hawk's War in Illinois
1833	Congress passes compromise tariff Nullification debate ends
1835	Treaty of New Echota
Catharine Beecher publishes Essay on the Education of Female Teachers
1836	First McGuffey Reader published Second Creek War in Alabama
1837	Horace Mann elected Secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education
1838	Ralph Waldo Emerson "Divinity School Address"
1838-1839 Trail ofTears
spoils system
A way of selecting people for government jobs based on the idea that "to the victor belongs the spoils."
10.2
10.3
