Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 385
lL-
Significant Dates
!
1861	Confederate States of America organized Abraham Lincoln inaugurated
Fort Sumter surrenders
Slaves who come to Union army declared "contraband of war"
Confederates win First Battle of Bull Run
1862	Monitor vs. Merrimack sea battle
Union army wins Battle of Shiloh, Tennessee
Union navy captures New Orleans
Second Battle of Bull Run, Confederate victory protects Richmond Union victory at Antietam
1863	Emancipation Proclamation takes effect Richmond Bread Riots
Fall ofVicksburg
Battle of Gettysburg, Union victory protects Washington, DC New York City Draft Riots
1864	Battle of the Wilderness
Atlanta falls to Sherman's army, beginning of Sherman's March to the Sea Farragut wins Mobile, Alabama Lincoln reelected
1865	Congress passes 13th Amendment outlawing slavery
Lee surrenders at Appomattox Court House
Lincoln assassinated
This chapter traces life in the United States through the 4 years of the Civil War. The battles that were fought over those 4 long years determined the war s outcome. But the fighting also helped shape public opinion. No one, North or South, was prepared for the terrible death toll of the war, and the fear of being killed or losing loved ones haunted almost everyone in the United States during the Civil War. Ideas were also changing throughout the nation as the war continued. Many in the North who started fighting a war to save the Union went through periods of wondering whether it might be better to just let the South go and then ended up fighting to end slavery. Many in the South—slaveholders and nonslaveholders alike—who started out fighting to preserve their independence from Northern influence slowly became resigned to a different fate even if they never stopped resenting the reality that the war created. And many who began the war as enslaved people, officially “owned” by other human beings, ended the war as free citizens, many of them veterans of the Union army that had won their freedom. The Civil War changed all of subsequent U.S. history, and its impact is important to understand.
FORT SUMTER TO ANTIETAM,
1861-1862___________________________________ Explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
14.1
After Fort Sumter surrendered in mid-April, no further serious battles occurred for the next 2 months as each side sought to understand the others goals and strategy. Both governments raised and positioned their armies. The Confederates had only to fight a defensive war to protect their territory. They did not need to win victories in the North, only protect their lands to win what they wanted. The North, however, needed to defeat the Confederate army to reunite the nation. As the war began, the commander of the Union armies was the aging hero of the War with Mexico, General Winfield Scott. He proposed what came to be known as the Anaconda Plan to blockade the South by sea, take control of the Mississippi River, and slowly squeeze the Confederacy into submission—as an anaconda snake squeezed its victim—without a full-scale invasion of the region that he thought would be too bloody and lead to generations of hatred no matter what the outcome. But many Northerners believed that the North needed to defeat the Confederates on Confederate turf.
Union generals wanted a lot of time to prepare supplies and train recruits. In Lincoln’s opinion, his generals always wanted more time—until Grant took command much later in the war. When General Irvin McDowell, commander of the Union forces in 1861, complained that he had only green recruits, the president responded, “[Y]ou are green, it is true, but they are green, also; you are all green alike. For Lincoln, a quick attack on the Confederacy, especially if Richmond could be taken, would mean victory. No one was yet thinking of a long war.
rebel yell
A frightening yell that Confederate soldiers gave when entering battle. Many Northern troops commented on how unnerving it could be.
Early Inconclusive Battles
The first serious battle of the war took place on July 21, 1861 (see Map 14-1). At Lincolns prodding, McDowell, with 18,000 troops, finally advanced fro® Washington across the Potomac River into Virginia. The army was accompanied by Northern reporters, members of Congress, and others who thought it would be the one time they would see a battle. Confederate commander Pierre Beauregard was alerted to the Union army s movement by Confederate spies in Washington. The armies met at the small town of Manassas, Virginia, on Bull Run Creek. (Northerners called it the First Battle of Bull Run, Southerners the Battle of Manassas.) Union troops, tired from the long march from Washington, started to surround the Confederate forces, but the Confederates held their ground. In an afternoon charge, Confederates let out the scream that came to be known as the rebel yell. One Northerner said “There is nothing
386 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877

Soldiers on both sides, like these Union soldiers in camp, spent most of the first months of the war either in training or sitting in camp and waiting. Note the one African-American off to the side. This early in the war, African-Americans were not yet in uniform, but that would soon change.
like it on this side of the infernal region.” The Union troops began to flee, merging with panic-stricken civilians who ran back to the relative safety of Washington, DC.
The Battle of Manassas, or First Bull Run, was a clear Confederate victory. It gave the Confederates great, perhaps even dangerously high, levels of confidence. Confederate newspapers asked why their generals had not gone on to capture Washington, though in fact McDowell had done a good job of developing the defense of the capital. Northerners were despairing. Horace Greeley, who had done much to stir up support for the war, now wrote to Lincoln, “If it is best for the country and for mankind that we make peace with the rebels, and on their own terms, do not shrink even from that.” Lincoln had no intention of taking that action, but the president now realized that it would take more than a few easy battles to win the war. Perhaps Mary Boykin Chesnut, the plantation wife who was deeply devoted to the Southern cause but never blind to reality, best understood the impact of the first battle when she wrote that she feared this early victory “lulls us into a fooTs paradise of conceit.
Lincoln responded to the loss at Bull Run by calling for 1 million new volunteers. He fired several Union generals, including the unlucky McDowell, reorganized the army on the Maryland-Virginia line as the Army of the Potomac—which would remain the prime Union army throughout the war—and appointed George B. McClellan to command it. He tightened federal control in Washington and Maryland. In addition, he reorganized federal troops in the West as a separate army, with orders to proceed down the Mississippi River and try to divide the Confederacy. The country was in for a long war.
Although some in the South were clamoring for Confederate troops to march north and defeat the “damn Yankees,” Jefferson Davis believed that the key to Confederate victory was doing what George Washington had done in the Revolution: simply survive. In time, he hoped, Northern opinion would tire of war and foreign governments would recognize the South.
Many in the South were confident that Britain would support them because of British need for Southern cotton. But they underestimated abolitionist opinion in Britain-which had abolished slavery in its own colonies in the 1830s-and the
Army of the Potomac
The main Union army led by a series of generals until Ulysses S. Grant took command in 1863 and led it to the final victory in 1865.
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 387
MAP 14-1 Major Civil War Battles, 1861-1862. As this map shows, during the first 2 years of the war,the major battles took place in northern Virginia, where the Confederacy tried to defend its capital of Richmond and Union forces defended Washington, DC, and in the Mississippi River valley.
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
caution of the British government, which wanted to “keep quite clear of the conflict.” Some owners and workers in the cotton mills in Manchester and Liverpool wanted a Confederate victory, but overall, British opinion was opposed to slavery. In the end, Britain stayed neutral.
General McClellan was a first-rate organizer, and he trained the Union army well. Ihe Army of the Potomac became a strong fighting force. Nevertheless, McClellan was never quite ready to fight. In one meeting with Lincoln, the general made but one request, “Just don’t let them hurry me, is all I ask.” By October 1861, McClellan was in command of 120,000 soldiers. The Confederate Army in Virginia was about 45,000 strong, but McClellan was sure it included at least 150,000 soldiers. Considering the possibilities for terrible loss of life, McClellan’s caution is understandable. For Lincoln, however, that kind of caution would result only in the end of the Union.
By December 1861, there had been no major land battle since Bull Run. The cost of maintaining and supplying an army was still high, however, much higher than the expenditures of any previous peacetime government had been. Secretary of the Treasury Salmon Chase reported difficulty balancing the federal budget. The London Times reported “the independence of the South virtually established.” Then McClellan got sick. In January 1862, a discouraged Lincoln said, “The people are impatient; Chase has no money;.. .The General of the Army has typhoid fever. The bottom is out of the tub. What shall I do?”
The U.S. Navy Takes Control of Southern Rivers and Ports
The Union cause was not as bleak as Lincoln feared. Although the North and South began the war with more or less equal size armies, the North had a much stronger navy. As early as August 1861, the U.S. Navy attacked Confederate fortifications on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. By November, the Union controlled the sea islands off South Carolina and, not incidentally, some 10,000 slaves who had been left behind by fleeing plantation owners. With the U.S. Navy attacking Southern coastal fortifications and beginning a blockade of Southern ports early in the war, the South was losing access to the Atlantic. By April 1862, only the ports of Charleston, South Carolina; Wilmington, North Carolina; and Savannah, Georgia, were still open. From these ports, the South sent fast blockaderunning ships to maintain contact with the rest of the world, getting supplies from the Bahamas, Bermuda, and Cuba as well as from Britain and France, but at high cost.
The closing of its ports by the U.S. Navy also led the Confederacy to build a new kind of ship. At the Tredegar Iron Works in Virginia, armor plates were placed on a salvaged ship that had been the U.S.S. Merrimack but was renamed the C.S.S. Virginia. The Virginia also had 10 well-protected guns and an iron ram that could sink wooden ships. While the North celebrated the early naval victories, word of a new Southern ironclad led the U.S. Navy to plan for a similar ship. An eccentric designer, John Ericsson, proposed a strange but potentially powerful design for an ironclad that looked like a floating raft that had a revolving gun turret with two 11-inch guns. His ship was named the Monitor. When the C.S.S. Virginia sank two Union ships off the mouth of the James River, the Navy ordered the Monitor to proceed south from the Brooklyn Navy Yard without even time for a test run. On March 9, 1862, the crew of the Virginia saw something they thought “was a raft” taking one of the Navy ships boilers “to shore for repairs,” but then the boiler started firing at them. After hours of firing and maneuvering, the Virginia returned to port, and each side declared victory. The two ships never fought again—the crew of the Virginia blew up their ship rather than let it fall into Northern hands when the Union army invaded Virginia in May 1862, and the Monitor sank in a gale. But naval warfare had changed forever as the two ships showed that ironclads could easily defeat a wooden-hulled navy. For the remainder of the Civil War, however, fast wooden ships continued as best they could to keep the Confederacy supplied with war material by outrunning the U.S. Navy, and the U.S. Navy blockaded most Southern commerce.
14.1
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 389
14.1
The seagoing ironclad ships, the Virginia (formerly the Merrimack) and the Monitor fought one battle in March 1862, but the Union Navy's smaller ironclad riverboats, like the one shown here, did more to turn the tide of the war as they attacked Confederate fortifications all along the Mississippi River and its tributaries.
In early 1862, the U.S. Navy also won important battles on the Mississippi River. Cairo, Illinois, where the Ohio River flows into the Mississippi, was the southernmost city under Union control. South of Cairo, the Confederacy controlled the Mississippi as well as the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers that flowed into it. The navy commander at Cairo was Andrew H. Foote, a sober abolitionist, while the army commander was the hard-drinking Ulysses S. Grant, who had given little thought to abolition before the war. Together, they attacked the South’s rivers. On February 6, 1862, Union forces overwhelmed Confederate Fort Henry, and Union gunboats turned the Tennessee River into a Union thoroughfare. Grant became a hero. The Union controlled most of Kentucky and Tennessee. Southern optimism disappeared.
In April 1862, a fleet commanded by David G. Farragut got past a string of Confederate forts and took New Orleans, the largest city in the South, which remained in Union hands for the duration of the war. Farragut’s ships moved up the Mississippi, capturing Baton Rouge and Natchez by the end of June. Only Vicksburg on high bluffs over the Mississippi River prevented complete Union control of the river, which would have cut the Confederacy in half.
The Beginning of a Long War
While the Union navy won battles, General Grant led 40,000 troops in an attack on Corinth, Mississippi. Corinth was where the South’s major north-south and east-west rail lines crossed, and Grant meant to disrupt the network. Before Grant’s forces got to Corinth, however, Southern forces attacked the Union army near Shiloh Church in Tennessee on April 6. In 2 days of terrible fighting, Grant won, but at a high cost of killed or wounded troops—13,047 for the Union and 10,699 for the Confederates.
Shiloh undermined morale in both armies. A Confederate private wrote, “I never realized the pomp and circumstance’ of the thing called glorious war until I saw this... .Men. • • lying in every conceivable position; the dead.. .with their eyes wide open, the wounded begging piteously for help.” Union General William T. Sherman said, “The scenes on this field would have cured anybody of war.” The cost of the Union victory at Shiloh convinced many that it would be a long and terrible war. Mary Boykin Chesnut wrote in her diary, “I have nothing to chronicle but disasters.” Nevertheless, by May 1862, Union forces had won control of several Southern rivers and cities, disrupted the Southern rail system, and taken many prisoners. Grant, however, would spend the next year stalled at Vicksburg.
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
390
With Union victories in the west, Lincoln urged McClellan to attack the Confederate forces in the east. The Confederate Army of Northern Virginia was the South’s elite force, assigned to protect the capital of Richmond, Virginia, and the essential supply sources nearby. McClellan landed troops on the Virginia coast to march up the peninsula—hence the name the Peninsular Campaign of 1862—to capture Richmond. With 135,000 troops, he seemed poised for victory. But McClellan moved slowly, with great caution, driving Lincoln to distraction.
In May and June 1862, Confederate General Stonewall Jackson defeated Northern forces in the Shenandoah Valley and kept Knoxville and much of east Tennessee in Confederate hands. It was an area filled with Northern sympathizers. But Jackson kept winning. Northern troops had had to be diverted from the attack on Richmond to deal with Jackson, whose troops had captured badly needed food and medical supplies.
At the end of May, Union and Confederate forces fought a series of inconclusive engagements at the Chickahominy River only a few miles from Richmond. Jefferson Davis made Robert E. Lee commander of the Army of Northern Virginia, a move that almost turned the tide of war. Lee forced McClellan to pull back from Richmond to the James River. The costs of the war were getting higher. General D. H. Hill, whose unit Lee had ordered to attack Union forces at Malvern Hill on July 1, said of the result, it “was not war—it was murder.” Some 20,000 Confederates had been killed or wounded, twice as many as in the Union army, but Lee kept up the pace.
At the end of August 1862, Union and Confederate armies met again at Manassas on Bull Run Creek where the South had won its first victory a year before. The Confederates, led by Lee and Jackson, again defeated the Union army, which pulled back into northern Virginia. At the beginning of the summer, Union soldiers could hear the church bells of Richmond. By the end of August, Richmond was safe, and the Confederate army was within 20 miles of Washington, DC. It was a major reversal of fortunes.
Army of Northern Virginia
The main Confederate army led for most of the war by Robert E. Lee, it fought in Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania before surrendering at Appomattox Court House in April 1865.
142
143
144
By the fall of 1862, Lee and Jefferson Davis wanted a decisive win as badly as Lincoln had. The Confederate army planned to encircle Washington, DC. At Antietam Creek near Sharpsburg, Maryland, McClellan attacked Lee’s army on September 17, 1862. The result was the single bloodiest day of the war with approximately 23,000 soldiers killed or wounded—four times the number of U.S. soldiers killed or wounded on D-Day in World War II. Neither side could claim victory at Antietam, but neither side was defeated. The next day, Lee withdrew his army to the relative safety of the Shenandoah Valley in Virginia, but McClellan did not pursue Lee’s retreating forces, which was the last straw for Lincoln. When a month later McClellan still had not moved and reported that he needed to rest his horses before any attack, Lincoln telegraphed, “Will you pardon me for asking what the horses of your army have done since the battle of Antietam that fatigue anything?” It was the end of the president’s patience, and he relieved McClellan of command.
14.1
Quick Review Why were early Union Army generals so reluctant to fight as hard as Lincoln wanted? Why was the Navy so important to the North's ultimate victory?
14.2
THE ROAD TO EMANCIPATION
Analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities, leading to the Emancipation Proclamation and to black soldiers in the Union army.
Lincoln had long insisted that although he personally thought slavery evil, it was not the role of the national government to interfere with the settled institutions of states. Soon after his election, he wrote to former Congressman Alexander Stephens of Georgia, who was trying to convince his state not to secede:
Do the people of the South really entertain fears that a Republican administration would, directly, or indirectly, interfere with their slaves, or with them, about their slaves? If they do, I wish to assure you, as once a friend, and still,
I hope, not an enemy, that there is no cause for such fears.
After he had assumed office, and even after the fighting began, Lincoln kept restating the same position.
Once the Southern states began to secede, his top priority was to hold the Union together with or without slavery. As late as August 1862, Lincoln wrote to Horace Greeley, knowing that his words would be published in the New York Tribune, insisting, “My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or destroy slavery.” He closed the letter noting that this was his official position but that he also intended “no modification of my oft-expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free.” But his official position was evolving, and some historians would argue so were his personal views.
Contraband of War
While Lincolns views were evolving, slaves and former slaves were clear on what they wanted from the war. Only a month into the Civil War, on May 23, 1861, three slaves found their way to the Union-held Fortress Monroe in Virginia and asked the fort’s commander, General Benjamin F. Butler, for his protection. Butler, needing workers, put them to work. He also coined a term for escaped slaves who came behind Union lines: “contraband of war.”
Since American law then defined slaves as private property, and since international law allowed belligerent nations to seize goods and property meant to help the other side wage war, there was logic to Butler’s new term. If slaves were property that the Confederacy planned to use against the Union, then the Union had a right to seize that property. Throughout much of the war, slaves who fled to the Union army were
392 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
14
known as contrabands. There were contraband camps” and “contraband schools.” Word of Butler s decision spread rapidly. More slaves started coming to Fortress Monroe, which some now called freedom fort. Lincoln was not yet ready to set firm policy, but Butler s policy was approved, and Fortress Monroe continued to be a haven for escaping slaves.
Nevertheless, federal authorities—including new officials appointed by Lincoln— continued to enforce the Fugitive Slave Act in the District of Columbia, and some generals returned slaves to their rightful” owners. With no national policy to guide him, General John C. Fremont, the head of the U.S. Army in Missouri, announced that his troops would emancipate any slave belonging to a Confederate supporter. This announcement infuriated Lincoln because he believed that he—and not one of his generals—should decide an issue as weighty as emancipation.
Lincoln pressed for compensated emancipation in which the government would pay to free slaves in the areas loyal to the Union. Slaveholders in Kentucky, however, had no interest in giving up their slaves with or without payment, and the idea went nowhere. Lincoln also pursued the possibility of colonization in which freed slaves could leave the United States for Central America or even Africa. No nation showed much interest in the project, and freed slaves showed even less interest. Lincoln continued to be more interested in keeping Kentucky loyal to the Union than in the fate of any slaves. A Northern reporter noted, “In all attempts to soothe southern wrath, the negro is thrown in as the offering.” Well into 1862, there was little cause for optimism for those who wanted the war to end slavery. Former slave and abolitionist leader Frederick Douglass wrote of his disappointment: “In dealing with the causes of our present troubles, we find in quarter high and low, the most painful evidences of dishonesty.” For Douglass, the problem was obvious, “We have attempted to maintain our Union in utter defiance of the moral chemistry of the universe.... We have sought to bind the chains of slavery on the limbs of the black man, without thinking that at last we should find the other end of that hateful chain about our own necks. Regardless, in 1862, most of Northern white public opinion was not ready to agree with Douglass.
contrabands
Also known as contraband of war, the name Union generals gave to former slaves who escaped to the Union lines and worked in support of Union troops.
colonization
A plan, popular in the 1830s and briefly considered by President Lincoln, to create colonies in Africa to which former slaves might return. It was never popular with slaves or former slaves themselves.
, Mrmpr slaves now officially contraband of war, waited for their next r of 1862, a group of	WQu|d be fight|ng as full-fledged soldiers in the Union army.
•nthesu
assignment. Before long many such former s
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War
393
I
As the Union army marched deeper into the Confederacy, however, commanders realized that slaves could be of great value to them. Slaves knew the country, they knew hidden roadways, and they knew what white Southerners were thinking. George E. Stephens, one of the few black newspaper reporters accompanying Union troops, wrote that “when the Union soldier meets the negro in the enemy’s country, he knows him as a friend.” For many Union soldiers, meeting slaves firsthand began to change their minds. Future president James A. Garfield, commanding an Ohio unit in Tennessee, said that he found “the rank and file of the army steadily and surely becoming imbued with sympathy for the slaves and hatred for slavery.”
With or without authorization, some blacks began to fight in the Union army. In Indian Territory (Oklahoma), blacks who lived with Creeks and Seminoles joined them in attacking other tribal members who had signed a treaty with the Confederates. Union officers in Kansas and on the coast of South Carolina began to recruit black troops. Secretary of War Edward M. Stanton approved the move, though he asked his officers to keep it quiet because it was “so much in advance of public opinion.” But the government needed more soldiers, and many blacks wanted to fight—if the fighting was for their freedom.
Issuing the Emancipation Proclamation
President Lincoln also began to change his mind. Lincoln was far too wise a politician to reveal all of his thinking. He had long said that although he thought slavery a terrible evil, the Constitution protected slavery where it already existed, and his only goal was stopping its spread into new territories. In 1861 and early 1862, his priority was securing the loyalty of Kentucky and other border states, which meant protecting slavery there. He understood that many Northerners feared free blacks almost as much as they disliked slavery. Public opinion would support a fight to save the Union, but not necessarily a fight to end slavery.
But by 1862, Northern opinion was changing. Generally, the Northern thinking was that the slaveholding South was waging war against the United States because it wanted to defend the institution of slavery, and it was using slaves to support the war effort while its young white men went off to war. Abolitionists were getting an audience where they had previously been shunned. Blacks were willing to fight in the Union army when many whites were not. And many slaves were fleeing to the Union lines. In July 1862, the Republican-dominated Congress declared that anyone convicted of assisting the rebellion against the U.S. government was liable to seizure and sale of all property and that all rebel-owned slaves who escaped to the Union army were “forever free of their servitude.” Lincoln then began discussing emancipation with his cabinet in July. Secretary of State Seward among others urged caution until a Northern victory would make talk of emancipation look less like a desperate measure.
On September 22, 1862, Lincoln told his cabinet that he had promised God that if Lee’s army was forced out of Maryland where they were then trying to encircle Washington, DC, then he would act. The Battle of Antietam enabled him to do so. Senator Sumner had told him more than a year before that the South’s rebellion gave the president war powers, including the right to seize property, even the kind of private property known as slaves. The proclamation that Lincoln was planning to issue was, he said, a matter of military strategy. It was also directed at building Northern support for the war, especially black and abolitionist support. His proposed emancipation would apply only to those areas of the country that were in a state of rebellion as of January 1,1863. Lincoln hoped that, as a result, at least some areas would vote to shift sides and support the Union, and in an ironic twist, voters in Tennessee and southern Louisiana around New Orleans—both areas where the Union army was in control" did just that, thus exempting themselves from the impact of the proclamation.
The Emancipation Proclamation did not free a single slave when it was first issued. It did not apply in areas loyal to the Union, including slave states, and though it technically freed all of the slaves in the Confederate areas, the government had no
94 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Emancipation Proclamation
Decree announced by President Abraham Lincoln formally issued on January 1,1863, freeing slaves in all Confederate states still in rebellion.

power as of yet in areas that were not under Union control. However, the proclamation did resolve the issue of contraband slaves, made abolishing slavery a military goal, and fundamentally changed the Civil War.
Northern Democrats immediately attacked the proclamation. While the Democratic minority in Congress supported the war effort to save the Union, they opposed any widening of the war s goals. By 1862, some in Congress known as Peace Democrats advocated letting the Confederacy go rather than endure further bloodshed. In the November 1862 congressional elections, Peace Democrats attacked Republicans because, they said, the Emancipation Proclamation was widening the purpose of war and therefore making it longer and more bloody. The New York Democratic platform called the Emancipation Proclamation a proposal for the butchery of women and children, for scenes of lust and rapine, and arson and murder.” For governor, New York’s Democrats nominated Horatio Seymour who said that “the people of the South should be allowed to withdraw themselves from the government.” Seymour won, as did a Democrat in New Jersey, Joel Parker, who, although a “war Democrat” because he supported the war effort, was highly critical of the Emancipation Proclamation. Democrats gained control of the state legislatures in Illinois and Indiana. Northern Democrats opposed to emancipation also won 34 more seats in the House of Representatives. Since few Southerners remained in Congress, this number was not enough to win a majority, but it expanded the influence of those who wanted to challenge the president’s new war goals.
The November 1862 Democratic gains seem to have hardened the views of Lincoln and his cabinet. Just after the election, Attorney General Edward Bates, usually one of the cabinet’s more cautious members, ruled that free blacks had all the rights of citizens and that the Dred Scott decision held “no authority” except in the specific circumstances of the case. Bates’s ruling did not include voting rights; free blacks were considered like women and children, who were citizens but could not vote. Nevertheless, they were now citizens.
On January 1, 1863, Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring that all slaves in areas then in rebellion—about 3 million of the nation’s 4 million slaves—“are and henceforth shall be free,” and that the military should “recognize and maintain” their freedom. The proclamation also said that black soldiers and sailors could be organized in the “armed service” of the United States. There was no stirring rhetoric about human rights, only a claim of “military necessity,” but the Civil War was now a war to end slavery.
While Northerners debated and voted, slaves in the South voted with their feet. Slaves came to understand that their freedom was one of the issues the war would settle. Early in the war, many Virginia plantations lost all their slaves, and by August 1862, as Confederate troops had to be diverted from fighting to ensure that slaves did not escape, a North Carolina resident wrote that “our Negroes are beginning to show that they understand the state of affairs, and insolence and insubordination are quite common.”
Peace Democrats
Also known as Copperheads, a large faction within the Democratic Party that advocated immediate peace with the Confederacy on terms that would allow it to leave the Union.
Black Soldiers in the Union Army
In January 1863, just after Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, the Weekly
Anglo-African said, “A century may elapse before another opportunity shall be afforded
of reclaiming and holding our withheld rights.” Blacks, both slave and free, joined the
military in great numbers. More than 180,000 black soldiers—one-fifth of the nations
adult black male population under age 45 and about 10 percent of the total Union
force—eventually fought for the Union.
Former slaves quickly signed up for service, especially in the west where Grant encouraged full inclusion of blacks in the army. In Massachusetts, Governor John Andrew, with Lincoln’s support, authorized the organization of what became the Fifty-fourth and Fifty-fifth Massachusetts regiments. Civil War regiments were typically organized by states, but the Fifty-fourth and Fifty-fifth, although they were Massachusetts regiments, recruited free blacks from across the North-though with
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 395

American Voices
Susie King Taylor, “Reminiscences of My Life in Camp,” 1862
Susie King Taylor (1848-1912) published her autobiography long after the Civil War, but her memories of the war and the rumors of freedom that arrived in advance of the reality remained vivid. Taylor was born in rural Georgia but lived in Savannah as a child where she attended a secret—and illegal—school for slaves and learned to read and write. Soon after her trip to St. Simon's Island and freedom with the Union army, she opened a school for other newly freed slaves and later taught black troops to read and write while also serving as a nurse.
I WAS
born under the slave law in Georgia, in 1848, and was brought up by my grandmother in Savannah. There were three of us with her, my younger sister and brother. My brother and I being the two eldest, we were sent to a friend of my grandmother, Mrs. Woodhouse, a widow, to learn to read and write. She was a free woman and lived on Bay Lane, between Habersham and Price streets, about half a mile from my house. We went every day about nine o'clock, with our books wrapped in paper to prevent the police or white persons from seeing them. We went in, one at a time, through the gate, into the yard to the L kitchen, which was the schoolroom. She had twenty-five or thirty children whom she taught, assisted by her daughter, Mary Jane.... About this time I had been reading so much about the "Yankees" I was very anxious to see them. The whites would tell their colored people not to go to the Yankees, for they would harness them to carts and make them pull the carts around, in place of horses. I asked grandmother, one day, if this was true. She replied, "Certainly not!" that the white people did not want slaves
to go over to the Yankees, and told them these things to frighten them. "Don't you see those signs pasted about the streets? one reading,'I am a rattlesnake; if you touch me I will strike!'Another reads, 'I am a wild-cat! Beware,' etc. These are warnings to the North; so don't mind what the white people say." I wanted to see these wonderful "Yankees" so much, as I heard my parents say the Yankee was going to set all the slaves free....
On April 1,1862, about the time the Union soldiers were firing on Fort Pulaski, I was sent out into the country to my mother. I remember what a roar and din the guns made. They jarred the earth for miles. The fort was at last taken by them. Two days after the taking of Fort Pulaski, my uncle took his family of seven and myself to St. Catherine Island. We landed under the protection of the Union fleet, and remained there two weeks, when about thirty of us were taken aboard the gunboat P—, to be transferred to St. Simon's Island; and at last, to my unbounded joy, I saw the "Yankee."
Source: Susie King Taylor, Reminiscences of My Life in Camp with the 33D United States Colored Troops Late 1 st S.C. Volunteers (Boston: Published by the Author, 1902), pp. 10-12.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What steps did Taylor's family take to prepare her for freedom?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What does this document tell you about the priorities of enslaved African-Americans as freedom approached? What might explain the importance they attached to education?


ini
white officers. In rural Franklin Country, Pennsylvania, not far from the Mason-Dixon Line, 45 free black men signed up for the Fifty-fourth regiment and more joined the Fifty-fifth. Most free blacks who volunteered for service were from the lowest rungs of the economy, including Thomas Burgess, a carpenter; Joseph Christy, a woodcutter; and Hezekiah Watson and Thomas Cuff, quarrymen. The bounties paid to all soldiers for joining and the subsequent pay mattered to poor families—black or white. The opportunity to fight for freedom mattered even more to black soldiers.
In spring 1863, black soldiers in Louisiana fought hard and rescued white troops who faced defeat, turning what could have been defeat into a victory. At Fort Wagner, South Carolina, the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts regiment lost half its number, including its white commander Robert Gould Shaw, after requesting the right to be first in the assault. After those encounters, many shared Secretary of War Stanton’s view that these troops were “among the bravest of the brave in fighting for the Union.” Their bravery convinced some, including Lincoln, that they were as deserving as any whites not only of their freedom but also of the right to vote and participate equally in the political process.
Black soldiers also demanded, and eventually got, equal treatment within the army. Officers were told that any soldier, whatever his rank, who mistreated freedmen would be dismissed. The Militia Act of 1862 set the pay of black soldiers at the level of military laborers on the assumption that their work would be behind the lines. As their role changed, black soldiers demanded equal pay. Soldiers in the Massachusetts Fifty-
fourth and Fifty-fifth regiments refused to accept any pay until it was raised to that of Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
J
1
Even before, and especially after, the Emancipation Proclamation formalized their place in the Union army, thousands of African-Americans joined the army to fight for the Union cause and for freedom.
white soldiers. In June 1864, Congress provided equal pay and enlistment bounties for blacks and whites. In the army, blacks also had equal rights in military courts and rights to testify in trials, something they could not do as civilians in most of the country. Finally, during the last months of the war, blacks were promoted to the officer ranks.
The presence of black troops in the Union army enraged many in the Confederacy. In May 1863, the South refused to include black troops in prisoner of war exchanges since they had declared all such troops to be runaway slaves who should be returned to slavery. In response, and despite pressure, Lincoln suspended the exchange of prisoners until early 1865 when the Confederacy agreed to resume exchanges. Black prisoners of war were treated more harshly than white prisoners. In April 1864, when the Union garrison at Fort Pillow, Tennessee, surrendered to Confederate General Nathan B. Forest, he ordered the massacre of black soldiers. Blacks who fought knew what danger they faced, and they fought anyway.
Quick Review How did the battles fought at the beginning of the Civil War change people's attitudes about the war in the North and the South?
THE HOME FRONT—SHORTAGES, OPPOSITION, RIOTS, AND BATTLES
14.3
Explain how the war's death toll and civilian shortages affected life—North and South— during the war.
After the initial euphoria wore off, and as the reports of casualties began to circulate, support for the war dropped in both the North and the South. Even those supporting the war had second thoughts. It was not only the terrible toll from the battlefields, though nearly every family was touched by those losses, but also the wars effects on the home front, which had not been expected when it began.
Inflation and Bread Riots in the South
The wars heaviest toll was in the South. Ihe Confederate government never succeeded
in placing its financial house in order. Southern politicians had long objected to federal
tariffs and other taxes. It was hard now that independence was claimed to turn to
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 397
these taxes. Although there were modest tax increases, the Confederate government was always short of money. To finance the war, the Confederates issued war bonds. It was fair, many argued, for future generations to pay the cost of the war. But buying war bonds that paid 8 percent per year in interest when inflation was running at 12 percent per month was not a good investment. And even rich Southerners often did not have much cash to invest. Southern wealth was invested in land and slaves, and neither could be easily converted to cash, especially in wartime. So the Confederate government sought to solve its financial problems by simply printing more money—$20 million in May 1861, $100 million in August. Creating more currency, however, caused terrible inflation that undermined the sale of war bonds and drove the price of goods out of sight. In 1862, Southern workers saw their wages increase by about 55 percent while the cost of living increased by 300 percent. The price of salt, essential to preserving meat, rose from $2 a bag before the war to $60 by the fall of 1862. In addition, the disruption of southern transportation, especially after the loss of the rail terminals in Memphis in June 1862, meant that though one area might have ample supplies of food, other areas were literally starving.
Managing the home front in the South fell primarily to women. During the war, three out of four white men of military age—ultimately defined by the Confederate government as ages 17 to 50—served in the army, and one out of five of this age range were killed in the war. Margaret Junkin Preston of Lexington, Virginia, described a world in which there were “no men left.” In New Bern, North Carolina, women wrote to the governor to say that of 250 whites remaining in their town, only 20 were male, and of these 11 were old and three about to join the army. And in Carrollton, Alabama, a woman wrote to her governor in 1862 to say that the latest call for soldiers “almost literally depopulates the country of men.” For white women, this situation meant taking on new roles, including managing slaves. In 1863, Lizzie Neblettof Texas wrote to her husband that she was “doing my best,” as a manager and overseer, but by 1863, she realized that the news of the Emancipation Proclamation spreading in the slave quarter had changed everything: “I don’t think we have one who will stay with us.” Letters to distant husbands reflected how terribly their wives missed them and how these long separations were changing women’s role in a society that had prided itself on male dominance and female fragility. As the Montgomery Daily Advertiser wrote in July 1864, “The surface of society, like a great ocean, is upheaved, and all the relations of life are disturbed and out of joint.”
In spring 1863, food shortages led to bread riots across the South from Richmond, Virginia, to Mobile, Alabama. Women, often wives whose husbands were off fighting and who were trying desperately to sustain themselves and their children, attacked shops and warehouses.
By March 1863, the Army of Northern Virginia was subsisting on half rations, but the women of Richmond had far less. In April, a mob of over 1,000 women shouting “Bread, Bread” and “Our children are starving,” began looting shops in Richmond—first for bread and then for clothing. When President Davis threatened to shoot rioters, they dispersed, but the anger did not subside. The government tried to distribute food and to stop hoarding in warehouses. Nevertheless, as the war continued, it created streams of refugees, inflation, and starvation across the South. As many as 50,000 civilians died in the South during the war, in addition to the 260,000 Confederate war dead.
Taxes, Mourning, and Resistance in the North
Life was easier in the North. Most of the fighting took place on Southern soil, and the Northern economy was more stable. The North also had an established Treasury Department and tax system when the war began, though revenue that had been sufficient for the 1850s was not even close to meeting
the needs of a war economy. The financier Jay Cooke, one of the richest and most reviled bankers of his day, advised the Treasury Department and created new federal bonds in amounts that allowed not only banks but also individuals to buy war bonds. Cooke made a significant profit on these transactions, but the bonds kept the government solvent.
Congress also created the Internal Revenue Service and began a federal income tax in August 1861. Most people were exempt from the tax since income under $800 per year was not taxed, and only a minority made more than that. Finally, the federal government began issuing federal notes that were secured not by gold or silver but simply by the government’s promise to redeem them. Congress not only authorized such bank notes, which came to be known as “greenbacks’’ for their green ink, but also declared that they were legal tender, which meant that no one could refuse them as payment for goods or debts. The result was the creation of a solid monetary system that lasted long after the war.
Although there was little fighting in the North, families saw sons march off to war and often received the terrible news that they were never coming home. Death on the scale of the Civil War had never been known before—and has not been known since—in the United States. After major battles, newspapers and telegraph offices posted casualty lists. Close comrades or hospital nurses caring for those who died wrote letters to their families, and the awful news changed life for those waiting at home.
In many parts of the North, as in the South, communities were virtually depopulated of military-aged men during the war, and women took on roles that they had never before considered. Although the prewar North had less rigidly defined gender roles than the South, changes were significant for many.
Many Northerners never supported the war effort, and their numbers increased after the Emancipation Proclamation. By 1863, as the death toll rose and the prospects of defeating the Confederacy dimmed, the peace faction within the Northern Democratic Party grew rapidly, though the party always included not only Peace Democrats but also War Democrats who supported the war to save the union, if not the Emancipation Proclamation. Peace Democrats came to be known as Copperheads, after Republicans had coined the term, comparing antiwar Democrats to venomous snakes. But by 1863, Peace Democrats proudly took up the term and continued to call for peace while hoping to make more gains in the state elections of 1863.
By 1863, Ohio Congressman Clement L. Vallandigham had emerged as the leader of the Peace Democrats. For Vallandigham, the result of the war was “defeat, debt, taxation, sepulchers.” Vallandigham strongly disapproved of the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring that the government should, “look only to the welfare, peace, and safety of the white race.” His words touched a nerve in Northern public opinion but did not win over a majority. In a May 1863 speech, he said that “King Lincoln had widened the war from one to save the Union to one to free the slaves and must be stopped. General Ambrose Burnside, the Union military commander in Ohio, had issued an order that “declaring sympathy for the enemy” was against the law. Vallandigham was arrested and convicted. After briefly being jailed, he was exiled to the Confederacy. He met with Confederate officials in Richmond, then made his way to Canada where, from exile, he ran as a Peace Democrat for governor of Ohio in November 1863. Although he lost the election, Vallandigham did win 40 percent of the votes.
New York City was a center of opposition to the war. Its large Irish Catholic population had little interest in fighting for the rights of African-Americans. More free blacks, they thought, meant more competitors on the streets and docks of New York, and they did not like it. After Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation, New York’s Catholic Archbishop John Hughes wrote that we Catholics...have not
14,1
I
j 1C2
Internal Revenue Service	i
An agency created by Congress during the Civil War to collect federal taxes in support of the war effort.
143
greenbacks	i
Papercurrency printed on order of Congress * *
based on the federal government's promise 1 --- .
to pay rather than backed by actual gold or silver as security.
the slightest idea of carrying on a war that costs so much blood and treasure just to
gratify a clique of Abolitionists.”
While Northern support for the abolition of slavery was growing as the war
progressed, especially among troops in the army, Northern opinion was divided.
r 7	Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 399
New York Draft Riot
A mostly Irish-immigrant protest against conscription in New York City that escalated into class and racial warfare.
Irish Catholics were far from the only people in the North to dislike free blacks and have little interest in freeing slaves. As word of the Emancipation Proclamation spread in 1862, antiblack riots broke out in several cities, including Cincinnati where a strike by Irish dockworkers was defeated with the use of black strikebreakers. In Brooklyn, a mob attacked a tobacco factory where blacks were working.
As opposition grew in the North to the war itself, especially expanding the war goals to include emancipation, voluntary enlistment in the army declined. In July 1863, the government began to enforce a military draft, and the antiblack, anti-Abolitionist, antiwar fervor broke into violence. In New York City on July 13, mobs attacked the draft offices and then turned on black neighborhoods, Republican newspapers, and government offices. Blacks were beaten, lynched, and shot. Before it was over, 105 people, most of them black, were killed. Ihe New York Draft Riot was the worst riot in American history up to that time. Only the arrival of federal troops on July 15, fresh from the Battle of Gettysburg, ended the violence.
Warfare in the North and West
Although the Civil War was fought primarily in the South, battles took place in distant areas of the nation. A victory at Glorieta Pass near Santa Fe kept New Mexico in Union hands. In Missouri, bands loyal to each side fought battles throughout the war that spilled over into neighboring states and often were fueled by earlier disputes. William Clarke Quantrill, who had been among the Missouri “border ruffians” in the 1850s, led attacks on Union troops and sympathizers in Missouri, and in 1863, Quantrill led a band of 450 Southern sympathizers in a raid on Lawrence, Kansas. In retaliation for events in “Bleeding Kansas,” Quantrill ordered, “Kill every male and burn every house.” The band followed orders, killing 183 men and boys and burning 185 buildings in Lawrence, eluding capture by Union troops. Quantrill was eventually killed by Union soldiers, but many of his followers, including Jesse and Frank James, became famous outlaws and continued to terrorize parts of the West long after the war was over. Confederate agents also tried to arrange attacks on the Union from Canada and planned an uprising in Chicago during the Democratic convention of 1864, but nothing came of that effort.
Those involved in the New York Draft Riot of July 1863 attacked Union draft officials, Republican newspapers and supporters, and, most of all, African-Americans.
400 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Confederate and Union leaders both sought allies among the tribes in Indian Territory. Cherokee, Creeks, and Seminoles were all divided between some who thought the Confederacy would offer better terms than the United States had done, and others who sided with the United States. Even without Confederate influence’, some Northern tribes were angry at the U.S. government over the loss of supplies that had been diverted to the war effort and over Lincoln’s withdrawal of troops that were protecting the tribes from expanding white settlements, as promised in various treaties. In Minnesota in August 1862, Santee Sioux under Little Crow killed hundreds of white settlers and U.S. troops but were soon defeated. Little Crow along with 37 other Santee leaders were executed in the largest public hanging in U.S. history. Many from the tribe moved to Canada. In early 1863, the Shoshoni under Chief Bear Hunter, angry at the growing presence of white settlers and migrants in the tribe’s region, attacked white settlements in the Utah and Idaho Territories. Union troops retaliated, massacring most of the Shoshoni warriors along with women and children in an attack on January 29, 1863. As Indian-white relationships degenerated during the war, Union troops were diverted from the war with the Confederacy to fight Indians. Indians suffered no matter which side they took, and most whites looked the other way.
Quick Review How did political opposition, popular opposition (especially where violent), and economic upheaval threaten the war effort in the North and South?
FROM GETTYSBURG TO APPOMATTOX AND BEYOND
14.4
Analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
As both its proponents and opponents understood, the Emancipation Proclamation
widened the purpose of the Civil War. Military tactics also changed in 1863. Early in
the war, generals hoped for a short and limited war. McClellan was far from the only
general, North or South, who tried to avoid large losses of fighting troops. By the time
the war entered its third year, however, military and civilian leaders on both sides had
concluded that only a much more sustained offensive would end the war.
Lincoln relieved several cautious generals—McClellan, Hooker, and Meade—
before he promoted Grant to overall command. Davis, on the other hand, promoted
Lee to be the top military commander early in the war. In Grant and Lee, each
president had selected a general who was willing to fight a large-scale offensive war
and absorb large troop losses to win.
Gettysburg and the War in Pennsylvania and Virginia
In spring of 1863, Hooker, while he was still in command, marched Union troops into
Virginia, and the two armies fought for 7 days at Chancellorsville. When Stonewall
Jackson led his troops around the end of the Union lines, Hooker lost his nerve and
ordered a retreat. Chancellorsville was a major Confederate victory, though it came
at the high cost of 10,000 Confederate dead and wounded and 14,000 Union losses.
In the battle, Jackson was accidentally shot by his own troops and died a week later.
Lincoln relieved Hooker of command and appointed General George Meade to replace
Hooker. Meanwhile, Lee convinced Davis that the time had come to invade the North,
cut Washington, DC, off from the rest of the country, and end the war.
June 1863 was the high point of Confederate confidence and Confederate advances.
As Lee led the South’s largest army through rural Pennsylvania, many in the North—
not just the unfortunate inhabitants of the towns through which the army marched
grew fearful. If the Confederate army could control the Pennsylvania countryside,
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
they could attack Philadelphia or Washington as a well-fed, well-organized army of conquest. The North could not continue the war if its capital and major cities were under rebel control.
Long before any battles took place, Pennsylvania residents knew one was coming. While people living in many parts of the South had already experienced 2 years of war, such fears were new north of the Mason-Dixon line. Philip Schaff, a theologian and historian teaching at Mercersburg Seminary in Pennsylvania, remembered that trying times did not bring out the best in frightened and confused people. They turned on their neighbors because of pro- or antiwar politics or over squabbles about what to hide and where to hide it.
When the rebel army did arrive, Mercersburg was luckier than some towns, at least for its white citizens. General Lee ordered that “no private property shall be injured or destroyed.” Schaff described the first Confederate officer he met as “intelligent and courteous, but full of hatred for the Yankees.” Not all the Confederates who followed were as polite.
Mercersburg had a large free black population, and they suffered far worse than whites. Schaff said that some of the troops went “on a regular slave-hunt, which presented the worst spectacle I ever saw in this war.” When white households hid black friends, the invading troops “proclaimed, first, that they would burn down every house which harbored a fugitive slave.” And they considered all blacks to be fugitive slaves. Schaff was terrified that his servant Eliza and her son would be found. They escaped, but other blacks in the town were caught and sold into slavery. For blacks and whites, southern Pennsylvania in 1863 was every bit as much a war zone as Virginia or the Mississippi River valley had been in 1862.
Lincoln and Meade ordered the Army of the Potomac to stop Lee’s advance at all cost. The Northern and Southern armies found each other near the town of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. On July 1, Confederate forces drove Union troops out of the town and onto Cemetery Hill. The next morning, Lee ordered a major attack, but the Union army held its ground. After another major charge directly at the heart of the Union lines on July 3 known as Pickett s Charge for the officer commanding the lead unit— it became clear to Lee that, despite terrible losses, the Union forces, now reinforced, could not be dislodged. Of the 14,000 soldiers that Pickett led in the assault, only half returned. Confederate General Longstreet spoke of the Battle of Gettysburg as hopeless slaughter.. .one of the saddest [days] of my life.” In the 3 days at Gettysburg,
In the days after the Battle of Gettysburg, bodies littered the battlefield. Photographs brought the high cost of war home to people, North and South.
402 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877	___
£■1
51,000 soldiers were killed or wounded, 23,000 from the North and 28,000 from the South. On July 4, Lee began a painful retreat back to Virginia. The Confederate army would never again be a major presence in the North. Lincoln, however, was furious that Meade, like McClellan, did not pursue the retreating Confederates.
While news was arriving in Washington that the Confederate forces had been turned back, word also came of a second Northern victory. Unable to defeat the Confederate garrison at Vicksburg in 1862, Grant surrounded the city and starved it. After holding on for a year, on July 4, 1863, the Confederate forces at Vicksburg surrendered. Watching the Union army march into Vicksburg, a local resident wrote, “What a contrast [these] stalwart, well-fed men... [were to].. .the worn men in gray, who were being blindly dashed against this embodiment of modern power.” The entire Mississippi River was now under Union control. The Confederacy had been cut in half. Lincoln made Grant General-in-Chief of all Union armies. But it would be another hard year before there was another Northern victory like Gettysburg or Vicksburg and 2 years before the war ended.
The Terrible Cost of War
In early 1864, Grant took direct command in the East and marched into Virginia to attack Lee. He quickly stalled. In early May 1864 at the Battle of the Wilderness, Southern forces mounted a furious attack with high casualties. Neither side won the Battle of the Wilderness, but unlike his predecessors, Grant pursued the Confederate forces
14J
p—
i
j 14,2
! 143
14.4
American Voices
Cornelia Hancock, “Letters of Cornelia Hancock,” July 7,1863
s a young woman from a Quaker family in New Jersey, Cornelia Hancock was originally rejected for service by the Union army's Superintendent of Female Nurses, Dorothea Dix. Hancock responded by making her way, on her own, to the field hospital set up in the days immediately after the Battle of Gettysburg and, once there, was quickly put to work. Her letter home was written just 3 days after the battle ended.
Gettysburg, Pa., July 7th, 1863 Wall Street, Half Past Two O'clock, October 13,1857 by James H. Cafferty and Charles G. Rosenberg
Dear Cousin
I am very tired tonight; have been on the field all day— went to the 3rd Division 2nd Army Corps. I suppose there are about five hundred wounded belonging to it....There are no words in the English language to express the sufferings I witnessed today. The men lie on the ground; their clothes have been cut off them to dress their wounds; they are half naked, have nothing but hardtack to eat only as Sanitary Commissions, Christian Associations, and so forth give them. I was the first woman who reached the 2nd Corps after the three days fight at Gettysburg. I was in the Corps all day, not another woman within a half mile....To give you some idea of the extent and numbers of the sounds, four surgeons, none of whom were idle fifteen minutes of time, were busy all day amputating legs and arms. I gave to every man that had a leg or arm off a gill of wine, to every wounded in the Third Division, one glass of lemonade,
some bread and preserves and tobacco.
I feel very thankful that this was a successful battle; the spirit of the men is so high that many of the poor fellows said today, "What is an arm or leg to whipping Lee out of Penn." I would get on first rate if they would not ask me to write to their wives; that I cannot do without crying, which is not pleasant to either party. I do not mind the sight of blood, have seen limbs taken off and was not sick at all.
It is a very beautiful, rolling country here; under favorable circumstances I should think healthy, but now for five miles around, there is an awful smell of putrefaction. Women are needed here very badly, anyone who is willing to go to field hospitals.
Cornelia
Source: Henrietta Stratton Jaquette, editor, South after Gettysburg, Letters of Cornelia Hancock, 1863-1868 (New York: Crowell, 1956), pp. 16-19; reprinted in p. 288.] Robert D. Marcus, David Burner, Anthony Marcus, America Firsthand: Readings from Settlement to Reconstruction, Sixth Edition, Volume One (Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2004), p. 288.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What language does Hancock use to make the hospital come alive for those who are reading her letter?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What assumptions about women of the Civil War era is
Hancock challenging? What assumptions might she be reinforcing?
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 403
Id
14J ?
j
14.4
after the battle. At the end of May, Union forces took control of the crossroads town of Cold Harbor, Virginia, but Confederate forces attacked, and Grant ordered a counterattack. The armies fought along a line from Cold Harbor to the Chickahominy River. In this case, even Grant thought the cost too high. Wounded soldiers could not escape fires that roared through the thick undergrowth, and the suffering was terrible. He wrote in his Memoirs that this attack was the only one he wished he had never ordered. The Union lost 13,000 troops to the Confederate 2,500. In spite of the terrible losses, Grant still did not retreat.
In June 1864, Grant attacked Petersburg, then the second largest city in Virginia, and settled down for a siege. Grant telegraphed Lincoln, “I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer.” It was what Lincoln wanted from a general. But while Grant was not retreating, he was not making much progress either. Some newspapers began to call Grant a “butcher.” Others just wondered if the war would ever end.
At least three factors now caused the Civil War’s high death toll. Lee and Grant had shifted tactics from a limited war to a war of attrition. Each army meant to destroy the other, killing and wounding as> many soldiers as possible. After 1863, there were no more limited engagements. Weapons were also deadlier than anything used in previous wars. Finally, medicine was still in its infancy. The wounded often died from infections that only a few years later a new generation knew how to treat. Given all three factors, grieving became part of life, for troops and for families at home.
Before the Civil War, armies fought with muskets, which took time to load and were not that accurate. Most military authorities in prior wars agreed that the best way to attack was in a close-order formation in which a well-trained army marched forward shooting, reloading, and shooting again. If both sides had muskets, the inaccuracy and short range of the weapons reduced the danger to any one soldier. That strategy was what had been taught at West Point where most senior officers of both the North and the South had been trained.
But the close-order formation was a virtual death sentence to troops facing an army with rifles. The new rifles, developed in France and by the American James H. Burton at the federal armory at Harper’s Ferry in the 1850s, increased the distance that a soldier could shoot four-fold, and the spin a rifle gave to a bullet meant that it did a lot more damage to the human body. By 1863, Union factories developed repeating rifles that made the firepower of these weapons much faster and more deadly. The accuracy of rifles also meant that opponents could identify officers and shoot them, a reason why so many generals were killed in the war and why generals, like Grant, began wearing private’s uniforms. The South never matched the North in weapons production, and many of its new weapons were either captured or came from blockade runners. The South’s slow production of rifles was one reason it suffered more casualties than the North.
Artillery also became a key defensive weapon in the Civil War. New cannons that fired grapeshot and canister, rather than old fashioned cannon balls, were like giant shotguns. Defending armies in the Civil War could shoot down row after row of attackers.
A
Union cavalry officer described the results of these new weapons in combat. In July 1862, the morning after Confederate army units attacked Union placements at Malvern Hill, Virginia, he said, “Our eyes saw an appalling spectacle upon the slopes down to the woodlands half a mile away. Over five thousand dead and wounded men were on the ground...enough were alive and moving to give the field a singular crawling effect.” That result is what the new weapons of war did to people. Medicine, Nursing, and a New Role for Women
Many of those wounded in the Civil War died because of a lack of effective medical treatment. Indeed, more soldiers died of diseases during the war than died in combat. It was just after the war that European researchers Louis Pasteur and Joseph Lister developed modern bacteriology. No Civil War doctor, North or South, knew that
404 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
microbes in contaminated water or on hands or unsterilized instruments caused infection, or that mosquitoes could be as dangerous to troops as enemy bullets. Antiseptics did not exist. Medical education was primitive.
Military camps, where large numbers of men lived in close and often unsanitary quarters, were breeding grounds for disease. Many soldiers thought that it was better to avoid a physician than get close to one. Soldiers North and South agreed with the Alabama soldier who wrote that “I believe the Doctors kill more than they cour [cure] and with the Massachusetts officer who said that the regimental surgeon was “a jackass.”
To fill gaps in medical care, women began to nurse the wounded and the sick. Before the war, nursing had been almost exclusively men’s work. But now the men were fighting, and the women were determined to aid the cause for which sons, husbands, and lovers were risking their lives. In the North, the United States Sanitary Commission became a powerful voluntary women’s organization that was able to brush aside the army Medical Bureau and take on everything from raising money for medical supplies to providing nurses in field hospitals.
Elizabeth Blackwell, the first American woman M.D., began organizing the Sanitary Commission in 1861 and with widespread support, most of all from the troops whom its nurses aided, it flourished despite hostility from male army physicians. Ihe reformer and social worker Dorothea Dix was named “Superintendent of Female Nurses.” By the end of the war, Dix had organized 3,000 Northern women volunteers to serve as army nurses in addition to others who were paid directly by the Sanitary Commission. Still other women, most notably Clara Barton, who later helped create the American Red Cross, became free-agent nurses, helping wherever they could. Mary Ann Bickerdyke began serving as a nurse at Cairo, Illinois, and followed Grant’s and Sherman’s armies across the South. Mother Bickerdyke, as the troops called her, was the only woman Sherman authorized to serve in his advanced base hospitals.
Women in the South took up similar duties, often despite greater hostility. Southern culture, even more than Northern, treated middle-class white women as in need of constant protection. Moving into a hospital as a nurse was hardly protected work, and it brought women into close contact with male bodies, something
Sanitary Commission
Created in 1861 to improve the medical services and treatment for sick and wounded Union soldiers during the course of the war.
a nil	11 q ^nitarv Commission, treats wounded Union soldiers.
Ann Bell, a young nurse with the U.S Sanitary Lomun»iu' ■,
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 405
14.4
previously thought improper. But the sick were there, and the women were determined to help. The Confederate Baptist offered religious sanction for this new role for women saying that “they are most valuable auxiliaries. In spite of concerns about “delicacy,” “modesty,” and “refinement,” women went to work as nurses in the South.
Sara Agnes Pryor, who had lived in <omfort before the war, volunteered to help in Virginia hospitals. When she saw a nurse kneeling to hold the stump of an amputated arm she fainted and thought she was wholly “unfit for the work.” But Pryor overcame her “fine-lady faintness” and became a serious professional. Mary Rutledge Fogg was from one of the South’s grand families in Nashville, and she used her status to pressure Jefferson Davis to allow her to start military hospitals in Nashville, Memphis, and Knoxville after seeing “50 brave soldiers” die “for the want of proper nurses.” Phoebe Yates Levy Pember, a 40-year-old widow, was named matron of the Confederate hospital in Richmond where she and her sisters provided for the hundreds of wounded soldiers who streamed into the Confederate capital.
Women nurses, North and South, looked to their hero Florence Nightingale, the English woman who had virtually invented modern nursing while serving British troops in the 1853-1856 Crimean War. And, like Nightingale, the nurses of the Civil War sought to bring healing to wounded soldiers as well as comfort to the dying and those who were recovering.
Presidential Politics and Sherman's March to the Sea, Then North
While women like Pryor and Barton tried to comfort the wounded, soldiers fought, and Grant held his line in Virginia, it was not clear whether Lincoln could hold his office. Continuing losses, lack of progress at Petersburg, and hostility to emancipation all combined to strengthen the chances of the Copperhead antiwar Democrats in the 1864 presidential election. None were more aware of this situation than the leaders of the Confederacy. Lee knew he could not hold Petersburg forever, but he was confident that all he needed to do was hold the city until the November elections. If Grant made no progress, and casualties remained high, Lee and Davis thought that the Copperhead Democrats would win the election and make peace.
While the Democrats grew stronger, many Republicans were losing heart by 1864. Congressman Martin F. Conway, a Republican from Kansas who had once criticized Lincoln for pursuing the war too slowly, now asked the president, “For god’s sake try and arrange [peace] with the South.... The war-spirit is gone.” When in August 1864 the Democrats nominated General McClellan, whom Lincoln had fired for being too cautious, Lincoln expected to be a one-term president. His only hope, he wrote, was “to save the Union between the election and the inauguration” that would take place in March 1865. Then, the picture on the battlefield changed dramatically (see Map 14-2).
When Grant had come east to fight in Virginia, he left his closest subordinate William T. Sherman in charge in the west. Sherman began a march across the heart of the Confederacy. Just as the Mississippi River campaign had cut the Confederacy in half from north to south, Sherman aimed to cut it in half from west to east. Slowly avoiding major confrontations and keeping a careful eye on his supply trains, Sherman led his army, moving from Tennessee across Mississippi, Alabama, and into Georgia. Sherman saw little value or glory in winning battles. He said that glory in war, “is all moonshine; even success the most brilliant is over dead and mangled bodies, with the anguish and lamentation of distant families.” Sherman just kept maneuvering and kept marching, fighting when necessary.
Confederate General John Bell Hood tried to stop Sherman before he reached Atlanta, an important railroad center. In August 1864, Sherman changed course, and the Confederate general thought Sherman was retreating, but Sherman won the next battle on August 30. The Confederates then evacuated Atlanta and burned most of
406 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
v
MAP 14-2 Major Civil War Battles, 1863-1865. While armies fought in Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia all through 1863,1864, and 1865, a Union force led by William T. Sherman marched through the Confederate states from Tennessee to Georgia and the Carolinas.
the city. On September 1, Sherman led his troops into Atlanta. Mary Boykin Chesnut
wrote in her diary, “Since Atlanta I have felt as if all were dead within me, forever.
We are going to be wiped off the earth.”
As Sherman was taking Atlanta, Admiral Farragut led a daring raid on Mobile Bay, Alabama. Confederate forts guarded the harbor and well-placed mines (known then as torpedoes) blocked the entrance. When the lead ship in Farragut’s fleet was sunk by an exploding mine, the fleet stopped. Farragut, in one of the wars immortal
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 407
142
142
142
14.4
phrases ordered, “Damn the torpedoes! Full speed ahead.” Farragut s fleet won control of Mobile’s harbor. While Mobile, which was more inland, remained in Confederate hands, the port, which had been an essential base for Confederate blockade runners, was under Union control by the end of August 1864, adding one more link in the Union chain encircling the Confederacy.
Sherman’s taking of Atlanta and Farragut’s victory at Mobile Bay were important military victories, but they were also political victories for Lincoln and psychological victories for the North. Lincoln grew optimistic. Secretary of State Seward said, “Sherman and Farragut have knocked the bottom out of the” Democrats. Frederick Douglass, who had wanted a stronger abolitionist at the head of the 1864 Republican ticket, now said that “all hesitation ought to cease” regarding support for the president. Lincoln insisted that if he were reelected, the government must be based on “liberty and equality.. .an open field and a fair chance.. .in the race of life.” Even the Democrat nominee McClellan shifted his tone, insisting that negotiations with the South be “on the basis of the Union,” angering Copperhead/Peace Democrats who wanted peace on any terms. In November, Lincoln defeated McClellan by 2,220,846 popular votes to 1,809,445, ensuring Lincoln 212 electoral votes to McClellan’s 21.
After the capture of Atlanta, no one was sure what Sherman would do next. His supply lines were stretched to the limit. In response, Sherman proposed to cut his army loose from supply lines entirely, live off the land, and march his 62,000 toughened troops straight through the heart of the Confederacy. Lincoln and Grant agreed. There would be little armed resistance, Sherman argued, since the Confederate army was fighting in the North, not protecting the Confederate heartland, which they presumed was safe.
Sherman believed that “[w]ar is cruelty and you cannot refine it.” On November 15, he started his “march to the sea,” destroying every farm, factory, and railroad in his path. Troops destroyed all that the army could not eat or use. In Milledgeville, Georgia, then the state capital, Sherman’s troops met Union prisoners who had escaped from the notorious Southern prison camp at Andersonville. Some Union prisoners at Andersonville had spent years with only the barest rations, and their uniforms had turned to shreds. Many died there. The sight of these emaciated soldiers wearing rags “sickened and infuriated” the Northern soldiers. Along the way, escaping slaves and Southern white Unionists joined the march. Sherman captured Savannah, Georgia, on the Atlantic coast in late December. His telegram to President Lincoln said, “I beg to present you, as a Christmas gift, the city of Savannah, with 150 heavy guns and... about 25,000 bales of cotton.”
In January 1865, Sherman started north through Georgia and the Carolinas. His goal was to attack Lee’s army from the south while Grant attacked from the north. Sherman continued to destroy any of the South’s resources for waging war, including food. When the army reached South Carolina, one Union soldier said, “Here is where treason began and, by God, here is where it shall end!” Sherman seemed to agree, and another soldier said that by the time the army was through, South Carolina “will never want to secede again.” Every house they encountered was burned, and every village stripped of supplies. Sherman left the coast of South Carolina to others—and it was probably the good fortune of Charleston to be occupied by troops from the Unions Department of the South, including many black units, who saved the city. Shermans army then marched inland to the state’s capitol of Columbia, which was burned to the ground. When the army reached the North Carolina border, the burning stopped. But in South Carolina, the march left a trail of anger and resentment that lasted for generations as it demoralized a population that was already losing faith in the war.
The Road to Appomattox and Peace
Before Sherman could finish his march through North Carolina and into Virginia, other events began turning in Grant’s favor. As news of Lincoln’s November reelection, the capture of Savannah, and the destruction in South Carolina began to sink in, many
408 Party Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
142
TABLE 14.1 Major Battles of the Civil War
Battle	Significance	1
Fort Sumter Charleston, South Carolina April 12-13,1861	The firing on the federal garrison by Confederate forces was the opening of the war.
Bull Run or First Manassas Fairfax and Prince William Counties, Virginia July 21,1861	Union forces marching south from Washington, DC, were met by Confederates at Bull Run Creek. Many Northerners expected a short skirmish and then a march to Richmond, but the Confederates turned the tide, and Union soldiers retreated back to Washington, DC.
New Orleans, Louisiana April 23-28,1862	U.S. Navy ships under David G. Farragut took New Orleans, the largest city in the South, which remained in Union hands for the duration of the war.
Second Battle of Bull Run or Second Manassas August 28-30,1862	The battle was a major Confederate victory and ended Northern hopes for an easy attack on the Confederate capital.
Antietam or Sharpsburg Washington County, Maryland September 16-18,1862	Lee marched into Maryland but was stopped in a fierce battle at Antietam. Lincoln was furious that McClellan did not pursue Lee on his retreat into Virginia.
Fredericksburg, Virginia December 13,1862	Union General Ambrose Burnside led an attack on the town as a first step toward attacking the Confederate capital of Richmond but was defeated by a well-defended force commanded by Robert E. Lee. The U.S. Army lost 13,000 troops, mostly in ill-conceived direct attacks while the Confederates lost 5,000. Northern morale sank.
Chancellorsville Spotsylvania County, Virginia April 30-May 6,1863	A Union army led by General Joseph Hooker was defeated by a Confederate force, leading to a major incursion north of the Mason-Dixon line that threatened Washington, DC.
Gettysburg, Pennsylvania July 1-3,1863	The bloodiest battle of the war led to Lee's withdrawal back to Virginia, ending the threat to Washington, DC.
Vicksburg, Mississippi May 18-July 4,1863	Union troops commanded by Ulysses S. Grant finally took control of the Mississippi River from St. Louis to New Orleans and thus cut the Confederacy in half while securing easy access into the interior of the Confederacy.
Wilderness Spotsylvania County, Virginia May 5-7,1864	Lincoln placed Grant in charge of all U.S. forces, and Grant led a bloody drive into Virginia. The first battle took place in deep woods (hence the Wilderness), and Grant—unlike previous Union generals—simply kept going.
Cold Harbor, Virginia May 31-June 12,1864	Grant attacked the Confederate army and took horrible casualties. In his Memoirs, Grant wrote that this was the one attack he wished he had never ordered.
Atlanta, Georgia September 2,1864	William T. Sherman led 62,000 troops into Georgia, defeating Confederate forces and taking Atlanta. Sherman's army then began its "march to the sea" taking Savannah on December 21 before running north and attacking Confederate forces in South and North Carolina.
Mobile Bay, Alabama August 2-23,1864	U.S. Admiral David G. Farragut effectively ended blockade running out of Mobile, depriving the South of badly needed supplies.
Appomattox Court House, Virginia April 9,1865	Lee surrendered to Grant.
in the South began to lose hope. In early 1865, Lee even began recruiting black soldiers
with the promise of freedom for them, though not the end of slavery for others. By
March 1865, Lee knew his army could not stay at Petersburg.
The retreat of the remaining Army of Northern Virginia out of Petersburg left
Richmond open to attack. On April 2, while Jefferson Davis sat in Sunday morning
services in Richmond, a messenger gave him a telegram. Many in the congregation
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 409
142
142
14.4
14.1
14 J
143
14.4
thought they knew what it meant when Davis slipped out. All Sunday afternoon, the leaders of the Confederate government moved out of Richmond, taking what records, gold, and materials they could and burning the rest. By evening, mobs had replaced the government. The next morning, the Union army marched into Richmond, not to burn the city but to put out the fires that the retreating Confederates had started. The day after that, President Lincoln, with only a small guard of sailors, came to Richmond, sat at Davis’s old desk, and greeted former slaves who were shouting “Glory to God!” and “Bless the Lord!” When one former slave knelt at Lincoln’s feet the president said, “Don’t kneel to me. That is not right.”
Davis fled south from Richmond to Danville where he announced that “nothing is now needed to render our triumph certain, but...our own unquenchable resolve” But resolve was melting. Lee’s troops were weak from lack of food. He tried one last attack on April 9, and when that failed, sent word to Grant that he was ready to surrender. The two generals—Grant and Lee—met in Wilmer McLean’s living room in Appomattox, Virginia, that afternoon. Grant remembered the encounter. “We soon fell into a conversation about old army times... .Our conversation grew so pleasant that I almost forgot the object of our meeting.” But when Lee turned back to the matter at hand, Grant wrote out the terms of surrender. He allowed the Confederate soldiers to keep their horses and mules with them to help in planting crops for the year ahead, and Lee noted that “this would have a happy effect.”
The first Union troops to arrive in Richmond on April 4,1865 looked on a city in ruins. 410 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877

Explore the Civil War on MyHistoryLab
WHAT BROUGHT THE UNITED STATES TO THE CIVIL WAR?
By 1860, the United States was divided between North and South, a divergence centered on the issue of slavery. Other elements, however, also separated the two sides. The South was mostly agricultural and rural compared to the far more urbanized and industrialized North. By 1861, the two sides were in the Civil War as 11 southern states had seceded as the Confederacy. A bloody conflict ensued that lasted until 1865 and cost more American lives than any other U.S. war before or since. The Union eventually won, bolstered by its economic advantages, but only after the deaths of 752,000 men.
Union soldiers pose with a captured Confederate cannon.
RESOURCES OF THE UNION AND THE CONFEDERACY,
1861 	Industrial Workers	Factories	Railroad Tracks (miles)
Union	1,300,000	110,000	22,000
Confederacy	110,000	1,800	9,000
■ Union Ml Confederacy
SOURCE:
Multiple sources: Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research - http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ ICPSR/studies/2896? archive=ICPSR&q=historicaf+economic+data+united+states]; Railroads and the Making of Modern America Digital History Project, University of Nebraska-Lincoln. [http://railroads.unl.edu/shared/resources/1861_Railroad.kml]; Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research - http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/2896?archive=ICPSR &q=historical+economic+data+united+states] KEY QUESTIONS
Use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions: Comparison ►►► How did the South's population density contrast to that of the North?
Map area data based on census information.
Response ►►► Where were the major Civil War battles fought?
Consider different regional strategies that affected military campaigns.
Analysis ►►► How did the North win the Battle of Gettysburg?
Examine the course of this decisive battle.
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 411
14.4
Grant arranged for Lee’s starving army to receive military rations. At 4:30 p.m., Grant telegraphed Secretary of War Stanton, that “General Lee surrendered the Army of Northern Virginia this afternoon.” The long and terrible war essentially over. Grant wrote of a sense of sadness “at the downfall of a foe who had fought so long and valiantly, and had suffered so much for a cause, though that cause was, I believe, one of the worst for which a people ever fought.”
Lee’s surrender did not quite end the war. Jefferson Davis fled south, hoping to regroup his government, perhaps in Texas, until he was captured in Georgia on May
10.	He was held in custody for 2 years at Fortress Monroe before being released on bail. Davis was indicted for treason, but the charges were never pressed, although he was barred from ever holding a federal office again. During the next 2 decades, he tried various business ventures and wrote his defense of the cause he had led. Isolated Confederate units carried on the fight in remote areas, especially Texas, until May. But after the April 9 surrender at Appomattox, almost everyone knew that the war was over. Washington, DC, was draped with flags, people fired salutes, embraced, and sang. Soldiers on both sides found their weary way home. Those in the North were welcomed with grand parades; most of those in the South simply made it home.
Lincoln's Legacy
On January 31, 1865, even before Lee’s surrender, the House of Representatives voted 119 to 56 to add a Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution:
Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
The floor of the House and visitors watching in the gallery erupted into cheers and applause. Many of those in the gallery were African-Americans; people who had not been even admitted to the House gallery until 1864. The Senate and the states quickly followed, and the amendment became part of the Constitution on December 18, 1865. The war that began over slavery ended with its abolition in every part of the United States.
After visiting Richmond, Virginia, on April 4 and 5 and receiving the news of Lee’s surrender on April 9, President Lincoln gave what came to be known as his “last speech” at the White House on April 11, 1865. Of course, he did not know it was to be his last. Reviewing the president’s speech, the New York World said, “Mr. Lincoln gropes...like a traveler in an unknown country without a map.” In fact, the administration, the Congress, and the country were all groping to find their way through several extraordinarily difficult issues as the Civil War ended. Among the most contentious were those related to defining the rights of newly freed slaves: Did they have the right to vote? Did they have other political rights? Did they have a right to some of the land they had worked for so long? There were equally contentious arguments about the rights of the former Confederate states: Had they actually left the Union, in which case, did they needed to be readmitted, perhaps after a time as territories? Or had they never left the Union, in which case, could they could simply renew their place in the country and make their own laws? No one really knew the answers or how to get answers. As Lincoln said on April 11, Unlike a case of a war between independent nations, there is no authorized organ for us to treat with. No one man has authority to give up the rebellion for any other man. We simply must begin with, and mold from, disorganized and discordant elements.”
Lincoln also called the question of whether the Confederate states had left the Union a pernicious abstraction.” He did not want to debate whether the
12 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
v
thinking historically
Abraham Lincoln, Second Inaugural Address, 1865
As Lincoln took the oath of office for the second time, everyone knew that the Civil War was about to end. No one, of course, knew that the president had only weeks to live. But it was the occasion of one of the most memorable speeches in American history. Lincoln said:
On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago, all thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war. All dreaded it—all sought to avert it....Both parties deprecated war; but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive; and the other would accept war rather than let it perish. And the war came.
One eighth of the whole population were colored slaves, not distributed generally over the Union, but localized in the Southern part of it. These slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest. All knew that this interest was, somehow, the cause of the war. To strengthen, perpetuate, and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the Union, even by war; while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it. Neither party expected for the war, the magnitude, or the duration, which it has already attained. Neither anticipated that the cause of the conflict might cease with, or even before, the conflict itself should cease. Each looked for an easier triumph, and a result less fundamental and astounding. Both read the same Bible, and pray to the same God; and each invokes His aid against the other. It may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just God's assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men's faces; but let us judge not that we be not judged.
The prayers of both could not be answered; that of neither has been answered fully....Fondly do we hope—fervently do we pray—that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet, if God wills that it continue, until all the wealth piled by the bond-man's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said "the judgments of the Lord, are true and righteous altogether."
With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan—to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.
Source: Congressional Globe, March 4,1865, Senate, 39th Congress, 4th Session, pp. 1424-1440.
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
What does this speech tell you about Lincoln's views on the root causes of the war? Was his interpretation universally accepted?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What sort of postwar Reconstruction do you think Lincoln had in mind with his "with malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right" statement? Does it offer any hint of the possible nature of Reconstruction under Lincoln?
■in

states had really left the Union and therefore needed to be readmitted or whether they had simply been “in rebellion” and therefore, with the end of the rebellion, were back in their old places. The issue for him, he said, was much simpler: “We all agree that the seceded States, so called, are out of their proper practical relation with the Union; and that the sole object of the government, civil and military, in regard to those States is to again get them into that proper practical relation.” In fact, the issue was not so simple. If the states had actually left the Union, then Congress could impose conditions on their readmission such as granting blacks the right to vote. If they had never left, then it was more difficult to impose such conditions.
In April 1865, Lincoln began to give more attention to the postwar era. Some thought he had decided that guaranteeing former slaves the right to vote should be a key element in the integration of the Confederate states back into the Union, but he did not announce his policy. On the morning of April 14, he met with the cabinet to discuss what he was now calling “reconstruction.” He directed Secretary
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 413
of War Stanton to develop military districts and temporary military governments across the South to avoid anarchy and supervise a return to civilian rule. Those at the meeting remembered that Lincoln said the agenda had shifted from the war to a new set of peacetime issues on which “we must soon begin to act.” But Lincoln would not be the one doing the acting.
That same evening, the president and his wife attended a play at Ford’s Theater. He was shot by John Wilkes Booth, who had become convinced that Lincoln was, indeed, going to give former slaves the right to vote. Early the next morning, Lincoln died. As April 1865 ended, the country was in mourning, and it was at peace—and no one knew what the future held.
14.4
Quick Review How was the violence of the Civil War different from other wars in which the United States was involved?
CONCLUSION
When the Civil War began in 1861, people North and South hoped for and expected a short and limited war, but it was not to be. Four years of terrible violence would follow.
When the first calls for troops were issued, enthusiastic young men signed up for service in the Union and Confederate armies, anxious not to miss out on the adventure and glory that they were sure would come in a short and easy war. But attitudes changed quickly. In the first significant battle of the war, at Bull Run Creek near Manassas, Virginia, in July 1861 tourists from Washington, DC, accompanied Union forces to watch what they were sure would be an easy victory. But in spite of early predictions, Confederate forces turned the tide and the Union army and their visitors were quickly driven back to the relative safety of the nation’s capital.
In spite of early successes by the U.S. Navy in blockading many Southern ports and in opening up portions of the Mississippi River to Union forces, President Lincoln soon became convinced that the nation was in for a long and bloody war and began looking for a general who had the tenacity to lead troops to a convincing victory. But through 1861, 1862, and 1863, in spite of bloody battles— a second one at Bull Run in August 1862 followed by the bloodiest day of the war at Antietam, Maryland, that September; further battles at Fredericksburg, Virginia, in December; then Chancellorsville, Virginia, in April 1863; and Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, that July—the war seemed to have no conclusive end in sight. Battles took place as far away as Missouri, New Mexico, and Minnesota, some with western Indian tribes angry at expanding white settlement and some between Northern and Southern sympathizers. Many, North and South, began to lose hope.
In the North, Peace Democrats, soon calling themselves Copperheads, began to campaign for an end to the war and for letting the South go its own way. The New York Draft Riots of July 1863 illustrated the way many white immigrants in that city had little interest in fighting a war and, indeed, blamed local blacks—whom they attacked across the city—for causing their troubles. At the same time, in the South, starvation spread, and Southern cities, including the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, were wracked with bread riots.
While others debated, however, black and white abolitionists knew exactly what they wanted from the war—an end to slavery everywhere in the United States. From the earliest days of the war, abolitionists had urged Lincoln to use his war powers to free all slaves, and some, like the former slave Frederick Douglass, insisted that the
414 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
only terms on which the war could be won and the nation united was the complete abolition of the institution of slavery that had led to war in the first place. Finally, in the fall of 1862, after more than a year of caution, President Lincoln decided to act and on January 1, 1863, signed the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing all slaves in the rebellious states and calling on former slaves to enlist in the Union army. Former slaves who had been flocking to Union posts now joined the army and quickly attained equality with white soldiers as well as a reputation for valor that impressed many.
Still the war itself continued. Women, North and South, became nurses— a previously all-male profession—to help the wounded and suffering soldiers. In 1863, after the Union army’s victory at Vicksburg on the Mississippi River, Lincoln selected Ulysses S. Grant after searching for a general who had the determination to do what had to be done to win the war. Grant began a series of attacks on Confederate forces in Virginia in an effort to both defeat the main body of the Confederate army and take the Confederate capital of Richmond. At the same time, Grant’s former deputy, William T. Sherman, began a march across the South, from the Mississippi River to Atlanta, Georgia, and then a “march to the sea” that captured the port city of Savannah, Georgia, in December, 1864. As 1865 began, Sherman’s army turned north, marching through the Carolinas to attack Virginia from the south while Grant’s army had new victories in Virginia. Finally on April 9, 1865, the main Confederate army commanded by Robert E. Lee surrendered to Grant. Ihe Civil War was over. Days later, President Lincoln, who was just beginning to turn his attention to what might come next, was assassinated. The rebuilding of the country would be in other hands.
did that style of waging war
CHAPTER
The Civil War became a "war of attrition." How contribute to the Union victory?
Chapter 14 And the War Came: The Civil War 415
Chapter 14 Chapter Review
FORT SUMTER TO ANTIETAM,
1861 -1862 14.1
Explain how the early battles of the war shaped future events.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
What lessons did each side take away from the First Battle of Bull Run?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the strategies of the North and the South in the first 2 years of the war. How did each side’s strategy reflect its strengths and weaknesses?
3.	Historical Interpretation
How important was Union naval supremacy to the North’s eventual victory?
143
THE HOME FRONT: SHORTAGES, OPPOSITION, RIOTS,
AND BATTLES____________________________________________
Explain how the war's death toll and civilian shortages affected life—North and South—during the war.
Review Questions
7.	Cause and Effect
How did financial problems undermine the Southern war effort?
8.	Historical Interpretation
How did Southern women contribute to the war effort? How did the war change the role of women in Southern society?
9.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the Northern and Southern home fronts. How would explain the changes you note?
14.2
THE ROAD TO EMANCIPATION
Analyze how the war influenced attitudes toward slavery in white and black communities, leading to the Emancipation Proclamation and to black soldiers in the Union army.
Review Questions
4.	Contextualization
How would you explain Lincoln’s initial reluctance to link the war to the abolition of slavery?
5.	Historical Interpretation
What light does the Union response to escaped slaves shed on the diversity of opinion about slavery in the North?
6.	Chronological Reasoning
How did Lincoln’s views on emancipation evolve over the course of the war? How would you explain the changes you note?
14.4
FROM GETTYSBURG TO APPOMATTOX AND BEYOND
Analyze the strategies and costs of fighting a long and terrible war.
Review Questions
10.	Constructing Arguments
Defend or refute the following statement: “After the Union victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg in July, 1863, the eventual defeat of the Confederacy was all but certain.” What evidence can you produce to support your position?
11.	Comparison
How did Union strategy change after Grant was given overall command?
12.	Recognizing Cause and Effect
What factors contributed to the extraordinarily high death toll during the Civil War?
13.	Historical Interpretation
Reread Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address. To what forces does Lincoln attribute the war?
14.	Contextualization
What did “freedom” mean to Frederick Douglass? What rights and responsibilities did it entail?
416 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
v
This popular picture, drawn by A. H. Ward for Harper's Weekly in November 1867, illustrated the prime meaning of Reconstruction for many African-Americans, whether former slaves or former soldiers in the Union army. The end of slavery brought—for the moment—the right to vote.

For those who had been enslaved it was a day of freedom. They celebrated as others had done. Houston H. Holloway, a slave sold three times before his 20th birthday recalled the day emancipation came to Georgia: “I felt like a bird out of a cage....The week passed off in a blaze of glory.” Six weeks later, Holloway and his wife celebrated the birth of a new baby and “received my free born son into the world. For some former slaves, nothing mattered more than getting away from their old plantations. They moved short distances to be with friends and family or great distances to Louisiana, Indian Territory, or the North. For others, the news that they could now be wage-earning employees on the same plantations where they had previously worked without pay was the best option available. Whatever their situation and regardless of their previous status, emancipation changed every aspect of life for all people of the United States.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the development and decline of Reconstruction.
FEDERAL RECONSTRUCTION POLICY__________
Explain the political development of federal Reconstruction policy.
THE IMPACT OF RECONSTRUCTION___________
Explain the impact of Reconstruction on African-American life in the South.
TERROR, APATHY, AND THE CREATION OF THE SEGREGATED SOUTH_________________________
Analyze the reasons Reconstruction ended and the impact of Redemption.
153
