CHAPTER 7
Practicing Democracy, 1789-1800
Convening a Congress, Inaugurating a President, Adopting a Bill of Rights Creating an Economy: Alexander Hamilton and the U.S. Economic System Setting the Pace—The Washington Administration
The Rise of Political Parties and III Will—Adams and Jefferson
1754-1783
Far more than anyone else, George Washington dominated the era leading up to and through the American Revolution. It is important to remember that for much of this time, he was—as pictured here—an officer in the British army.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how Britain's victory over France in the war of 1754-1763 exacerbated the grievances of many colonists and led to renewed conflict culminating in the American Revolution and the Declaration of Independence.
5.1
PRELUDES TO REVOLUTION
Explain Britain's victory over France in the French and Indian War and what conflicts followed this victory.
5.2
THE REVOLUTION WAS IN THE MINDS OF THE PEOPLE
Explain why, in the 15 years before the Revolutionary War began, support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of North Americans who opposed Britain for different reasons.
THE WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE
Explain how political and military strategy, support for the patriot cause, and American alliances with France and Spain led to an American victory in the war for independence.
On May 28, 1754, George Washington, then a 22-year-old gentleman farmer recently promoted to lieutenant colonel in the Virginia militia, and Tanaghrisson, an Iroquois chief, led a force of Virginia militia and Indians to attack French soldiers in what is now western Pennsylvania. The French troops had been sent from Fort Duquesne-modern Pittsburgh—to look for Washington’s force. Fort Duquesne was part of a string of French forts built along the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to maintain New France’s claims in the region. The French perspective was that the English were trespassing on their territory. Washington, however, was asserting the British claim to the Ohio River Valley.
The English-Iroquois force surprised the French with a dawn attack. It had been raining and the French had failed to post sentries. Ten of the French were killed and 22 taken prisoner. The shots fired that May morning in what came to be called Jumonville Glen, after the French commander who was killed there, were among the first in a war that would have effects worldwide.
Although Washington defeated the French in that first attack, he knew that a much larger French force actually controlled the Ohio River Valley. He retreated from Jumonville Glen and built a small armed camp that he named Fort Necessity. In July, 50 French soldiers and 300 of their Indian allies forced Washington to surrender. The French allowed the English to return to Virginia but only after Washington signed a document admitting that he had attacked and killed—or assassinated, depending on how one translated the French—French troops in the May skirmish while Britain and France were officially at peace. That skirmish in Western Pennsylvania helped provoke a world war in the 1750s, and that war then influenced the residents of British North America, including George Washington, to fight for and win their independence in the 1770s.
Far more than anyone else, George Washington dominated the era leading up to and through the American Revolution. It is important to remember that for much of this time, he was an officer in the British army before becoming—as shown here—a leader of the American forces.
PRELUDES TO REVOLUTION
Significant Oates
5.1
5.1
Explain Britain's victory over France in the French and Indian War and what conflicts followed this victory.
In North America, the world war that started near Pittsburgh was known as the French and Indian War. Because of its outcome, French Canadians came to call it the War of Conquest. In most of Europe, it was called the Seven Years’ War. Whatever the war was called, it was fought over more of the planet than any previous war. The voyages of Columbus and subsequent maritime trade and migrations had created a vast interactive world, and in 1756, that world exploded.
The French and Indian War, 1754-1763
In North America, the formal declaration of war in 1756—two years after Washingtons skirmish with the French—surprised no one. The English and their Iroquois allies were in constant tension with the French and their Ottawa, Delaware, and Shawnee allies. Both sides hated each other and were ready for war.
During that time, Britain and France were also sliding toward war in Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Caribbean. In January 1756, England and the German kingdom of Prussia agreed to defend each other s territory. In response, Austria signed a treaty with France. War among these countries was declared in May 1756, and the French navy defeated a British fleet in the Mediterranean the next month. Counting on his English allies to provide support, King Frederick the Great of Prussia then attacked Austria and Russia. Sweden and Saxony joined the French alliance against Prussia.
The war quickly spread to Asia. The British East India Company and the French Compagnie des Indes each controlled parts of the Indian subcontinent, either directly or through alliances with local rulers. Suraj ud Dowlah, the ruler of Bengal, who was allied with France, used the situation to attack and capture British Calcutta. A British force
1754—1763 French and Indian War
1763-1766 Pontiac's Rebellion	F ~' i
Paxton Boys attack Pennsylvania Indians
1765	Stamp Act crisis	__—
Mid-1760s Regulator movement in North and South	!
Carolina	!
1770	Boston Massacre	— —J, {,,
1772	Slavery declared illegal in England
1773	Boston Tea Party
1774	Closing of the Port of Boston, Quebec Act, and other Intolerable Acts
First Continental Congress meets in Philadelphia
1775	First battles of the Revolution at Lexington and Concord
Second Continental Congress convenes at
Philadelphia
Battle of Bunker Hill
British governor of Virginia, Lord Dunmore, declares freedom for slaves that join the British cause
1776	Thomas Paine's Common Sense
British evacuate Boston but take New York City
Congress adopts the Declaration of Independence
Washington's troops capture Trenton,
New Jersey
1777	Congress adopts the Articles of Confederation to govern the new United States
American victory at Saratoga, New York
1778	France and United States agree to an alliance
1779	Washington's troops attack British-allied Iroquois villages
Spain enters war against Britain
1780	British victories in the South
British take Charleston, South Carolina
1781	American victory at Cowpens, South Carolina
Lord Cornwallis surrenders to George Washington and allied French forces
1783 Treaty of Paris
French and Indian War
Known in Europe as the Seven Years' War and in
French Canada as the War of Conquest, this war
was fought in North America between 1754 and
1763 and ended with the defeat of the French.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 119
53
118 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
under Robert Clive retook the city and the French post at Chandernagor. British control of Bengal, won in that war, laid the foundation for Britain’s 200-year rule in India.
Ihe British also attacked the main African slave-trading island of Goree off the coast of Senegal and took control of it from the French, hurting the French economy but having no impact on the slave trade on the island. Goree had been the port for transshipment of slaves since the Portuguese founded it in the 1500s and was valuable no matter which
While battles took place in North America, Europe, India, and Africa, much of the Seven Years’ War was fought in the Caribbean. British warships based in Jamaica captured the French islands of Grenada, the Grenadines, St. Vincent, Dominica, and Tobago as well as Martinique and Guadeloupe with their rich sugar plantations. At the war’s end in 1763, Martinique and Guadeloupe were returned to France in exchange for concessions in North America, but the British kept the remaining islands. After Spain entered the war on the side of France in 1761, the British captured Havana, Cuba, and Manila in the Philippines, all of which were returned to Spain in 1763 in exchange for Spanish Florida.
The war changed the landscape of North America (see Map 5-1 and Map 5-2). In 1758, after a French force defeated the English at Fort Ticonderoga in New York, a
'b.
British conquest of New France BUI French settlements EStt British settlements CZ3 Iroquois settlements
-----Land claimed by the
Ohio Company of Virginia French victories British victories French forts British forts
Washington gives up Ft. Necessity to French, July 3-4, 1754 Braddock’s army destroyed near Ft. Duquesne, July 9, 1755 British yield Ft. William Henry to Montcalm, Aug. 9, 1757 British capture French fort at Louisburg, July 26, 1758 British take Ft. Frontenac from the French, Aug 27 1758 Johnson captures Ft. Niagara from the French, July 25, 1759 Wolfe defeats Montcalm, Plains of Abraham, Sept. 13, 1759 Amherst accepts French surrender of Montreal, Sept. 8, 1760
MAP 5-1 North America Before and During the French and Indian War, 1754-1763.
-Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800

120 Part III A New Birth of Freedom-
British dominance in eastern North America MS Acquired by Britain from France Acquired by Britain from Spain I I Prior British colonies, as of 1763
Reserved to Indians under British rule Spanish Louisiana
Points of violence, 1763-1766___________________________
British forts seized during Pontiac’s Rebellion in 1763 • Towns demonstrating against the Stamp Act in 1765
Distribution of British troops____
□ British posts 100-250 soldiers British posts 250-600 soldiers
(”1 British posts over 600 soldiers
5.2

53
British force—with George Washington as one of its officers—took Fort Duquesne, renaming it Fort Pitt (today’s Pittsburgh) in honor of William Pitt, who had led Britain as prime minister during the war. That same year, Teedyuscung, leader of the Delaware tribe, decided that his French allies could not be trusted and sought an alliance with the English and the Iroquois. Although Teedyuscung and the Delaware did not get the Pennsylvania lands they sought, they and the Iroquois received a British promise that after the war there would be no white settlement west of the Alleghenies—a promise the British attempted to keep until the American Revolution.
In the most significant North American battle, a British army under General James Wolfe defeated a French army led by the Marquis de Montcalm and captured Quebec, the capital of French Canada, in September 1759. The British victory ended French control of all of Canada.
MAP 5-2 North America After the French and Indian War, 1763. Maps 5-1 and 5-2 show the extraordinary changes brought about by the French and Indian War of 1754-1763. The first map shows the relatively limited range of control exercised by both the British and the French colonies in North America when the war began, as well as significant battles between the powers.The second map shows the huge expanse of territory claimed by the British at the war's end in 1763 including the 13 colonies along the Atlantic coast, the large Indian reserve of land promised to the tribes that had supported the British, the former French colonies in Canada and the former Spanish colonies of East and West Florida that were also in British hands.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 121
L
}	5.2
i...........
5.1
53
Pontiac's Rebellion
Indian uprising (1763-1766) led by Pontiac of the Ottawas and Neolin of the Delawares.
G’A
KL\ V
X OKI C K .
By the early 1760s, both Britain and France were exhausted from the fighting. Although Britain had won major victories, its new king, George III (r. 1760-1820) wanted peace, and in 1763, the two countries signed the Treaty of Paris to end the war. (Both this treaty and the later treaty ending the American Revolution in 1783 were known as the Treaty of Paris.) The world war had many outcomes. All of the governments that fought the war emerged deeply in debt. In Europe, little land changed hands, but in other parts of the world, the changes were dramatic. Britain made concessions to bring hostilities to an end, but was still the biggest winner. Its dominance of India was secure, and the British presence on the coast of Africa and in the Caribbean was enhanced. In addition, Spain ceded Florida to England. Most significantly, the war eliminated France as a North American power although France did regain its control of the rich sugar-producing islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique in the Caribbean. France ceded Canada and the land east of the Mississippi River to the British. To compensate its Spanish allies for their support, France also ceded its claim to the lands west of the Mississippi River, along with New Orleans, to Spain. The French threat to New England and New York ended. Britain now controlled most of North America east of the Mississippi River.
Pontiac and Indian Responses
Hendrick, a chief of the Mohawk tribe—one of the nations of the Iroquois—was a close ally of the British until killed in battle in 1755.
For American Indians living between the Mississippi River and the Atlantic, the end of the French and Indian War was an unmitigated disaster. As a British official had said, “to preserve the balance between us and the French is the great ruling principle of the modern Indian politics.” For the tribes further south—including the Cherokee and Creeks—the Spanish presence in Florida had allowed them to play a three-way balancing act between Britain, France, and Spain. But with the French and Spanish out of eastern North America for the time being, the potential for bargaining virtually disappeared.
Even for the Iroquois, the cost was high. Although they were allied with the British, Iroquois power had partly come from Britain’s need for Iroquois allies in its competition with the French. After 1763, the French were gone. At the war’s beginning, the Iroquois Chief Hendrick, or Theyanoguin, had told the representatives of the British colonies who met at Albany, New York:
Brethren—The Governor of Virginia and the Governor of Canada, are both quarrelling.... The Governor of Virginia and Pennsylvania have made paths thro’ our Country.. .they should have first asked our consent.
Without the presence of the French in Canada, the British governors of Virginia and Pennsylvania had little reason to ask the Iroquois for consent to anything. The British general Lord Jeffrey Amherst, seeking to save money for his government and seeing no reason now to placate the Indians, refused to provide the gifts of ammunition and gunpowder that various tribes had come to see as a kind of rent for the use of their lands. The Indians considered the move to be both an insult and a fundamental threat since the tribes’ survival depended on the gunpowder to hunt deer.
For the Indians who had sided with the French, the outlook was even worse. Neolin, a Delaware, living on the Ohio River, preached resistance to the “dogs clothed in red” as he called the British. His visionary message, calling on the Indians to return to the “original state that they were in before the white people found out their country,” sparked a wide-ranging Indian movement to return to former Indian ways.
Pontiac, an Ottawa chief, was inspired and heeded Neolin’s call, sparking what came to be known as Pontiac’s Rebellion. In the spring of 1763, only months after the Treaty of Paris was signed, Pontiac
122
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
5.1
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Pontiac's Vision
Seeking support for an uprising, Pontiac described a vision similar to Neolin's in which the Master of Life or the Great Spirit told him to return to living by "the bow and arrow" with no need of "gun or powder" and to cleanse his people and their land of the ways of the whites. Pontiac said:
This land where ye dwell I have made for you and not for others. Whence comes it that ye permit the Whites upon your lands? Can ye not live without them? I know that those whom ye call the children of your Great Father supply your needs, but if ye were not evil, as ye are, ye could surely do without them. Ye could live as ye did live before knowing them—before those whom ye call your brothers had come upon your lands.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
Who did Pontiac blame for the occupation of Indian lands by whites, the English colonists or his own people?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In what ways does Pontiac's vision represent a call for cultural and spiritual reform? What connections might Pontiac have seen between such reforms and successful resistance to white encroachment?
■ill
convened a meeting of Ottawa, Chippewa, Pottawatomi, and Wyandot people near Detroit. Pontiac told his listeners of his vision in which he had been promised that, if they would cleanse themselves of the ways of the whites, they would see their lands and old powers restored. He insisted, “It is important for us, my brothers, that we exterminate from our lands this nation which seeks only to destroy us.”
Pontiac and his followers attacked British forts across the region. The British held Detroit and Fort Pitt, but many other forts surrendered to the Indians: Fort Miamis, near Fort Wayne, Indiana; Fort Ouiatenon, near Lafayette, Indiana; Fort Michilimackinac on the Great Lakes; and most of the old French posts in Indiana and Ohio. Most of the Ohio country was again in Indian hands. The British were caught off guard but fought back.
The English commander, Jeffrey Amherst, ordered his troops to put “every Indian in your Power to Death.” His troops won several battles. Amherst also encouraged the distribution of smallpox-infected blankets to Indians, a move that rapidly spread the disease. In October, Pontiac received a letter from the French telling him that the French were not going to come to his aid. On receiving this news, Pontiac initiated a peace process. He met with the British authorities in Oswego, New York, in July 1766 and signed a treaty of peace. Three years later, he was murdered, probably by other Indians who resented both the deaths his rebellion had caused and his relatively quick surrender that meant the deaths were in vain.
The Proclamation Line of 1763
Soon after the long French and Indian War, the new British monarch King George III and his first minister George Grenville tried to ensure peace in North America. They meant to honor the commitments they had made in 1758 to the Delaware and Iroquois tribes and protect them from white settlement. Already embroiled in Pontiac’s conflict, which largely involved formerly French territories, they did not want other rebellions, and they were wary that land-hungry settlers would quickly begin to expand into Indian-dominated areas. In October 1763, the king issued a proclamation that there should be no British settlement west of the crest of the Appalachian Mountains and that Indian rights to western lands would be protected forever. The proclamation also directed any colonists who had already settled in these lands “forthwith to remove themselves from such Settlements.” For many of the tribes who lived on the
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 123
The Proclamation Line
Royal proclamation of 1763 designed to protect Indian tribes by setting a boundary at the peaks of the Appalachian Mountains beyond which no western white settlement was to take place.
western slopes of the mountains and beyond, the Proclamation Line fulfilled what they believed they had been promised.
The Grenville administration took other steps to keep peace with the Indians. They replaced Amherst with the more conciliatory General Thomas Gage, who immediately resumed negotiations and gift giving with the tribes. The Grenville administration also strengthened the authority of the superintendents of Indian affairs, who had sought accommodations with the tribes since the 1750s.
The Proclamation Line slowed white settlement into western Pennsylvania, Ohio, and what would become Kentucky. But it also infuriated the British colonists—both land-hungry farmers and rich speculators—and did far too little to protect the Indians. Grenville and Parliament were too far away, and despite the British military outposts, their efforts to enforce the line were ineffectual, which had fateful consequences in the ! next decade.
The Paxton Boys and Rural White Responses
In the town of Paxton, in Pennsylvanias Lancaster County, a group of farmers decided that the way to end warfare between whites and Indians on the frontier was to get rid of j all Indians, whether they were allied with the British or the French. Calling themselves s the Paxton Boys or the Hickory Boys, these frontier vigilantes said:
We have long been convinced from sufficient evidence that the Indians that lived as independent commonwealths among us or near our borders were our most dangerous enemies.
In December 1763, the Paxton Boys attacked a Delaware village, killed six people, and burned the town. Then they killed 14 Indian survivors who were in protective custody in the town of Lancaster. They began a march to Philadelphia to find other Indians, especially Delawares, who had taken refuge there. Before the mob got to Philadelphia, Benjamin Franklin and a delegation of the colony’s leading citizens negotiated an end to the rebellion, but the hatred of Indians would haunt the inhabitants of North America for a long time to come. After 1763, many white residents of British North America began to lump all American Indians together as an enemy race, even though their parents and grandparents had viewed different tribes quite separately, depending on a tribe’s relationship to the British cause. Like many earlier wars, the fighting in the French and Indian War was between the British and the Iroquois allies on one side and the French and the Ojibwa, Ottawa, Shawnee, Wyandot, and other tribes allied with them. Soon after the war, the lines came to be seen as much more racial, with all whites allied against virtually all Indians. This change in attitudes had far-reaching consequences for the residents of North America.
Threats of New Taxes
Relations between the British colonists and the American Indians were not the only concern of British authorities after 1763. Victory in the war had virtually drained the kingdom’s treasury. Britain’s national debt was double what it had been when the war began. In 1764, George Grenville and the majority in Parliament asked Britain’s North American colonists to pay what the authorities in London thought was a fair share of the war s cost. Their argument was that the war had protected colonists far more than it had anyone living in Britain. What seemed just and equitable in London, however, was seen quite differently in the colonies. These differences on who should bear the cost of the war would soon have significant consequences.
5.1
Quick Review What expectations and concerns did Indians come to have regarding the British in the aftermath of the war of 1756—1763? What expectations and concerns were colonists beginning to have regarding Native Americans? Regarding the British government? How were the various expectations and concerns in conflict?
124 Partlll A
rf Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
5.2
REVOLUTION WAS IN THE MINDS OF THE PEOPLE”_____________________________
Explain why, in the 15 years before the Revolutionary War began, support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of North Americans who opposed Britain for different reasons.
Long after the Revolution was over, former president John Adams wrote to another former president, Thomas Jefferson, describing the Revolutionary War that began in 1775 as “only an effect and consequence.” According to Adams, “Ihe Revolution was in the minds of the people, and this was effected from 1760 to 1775, in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at Lexington.” He was right. For many British North Americans, a revolutionary change did indeed take place in their minds between 1760 and 1775, and it took place for many different reasons.
While people like Adams and Jefferson and many of their peers moved from being loyal British subjects to revolutionary advocates of independence in those years, others did not. People such as Thomas Hutchinson of Massachusetts, William Franklin (Benjamin’s son), and perhaps a fifth of the white colonists remained Loyalists— Americans who wanted to maintain loyal ties to Great Britain and who opposed the American Revolution. For reasons of their own, a majority of African slaves were probably also Loyalists. The Loyalists lived through the same momentous changes as those who embraced the revolutionary cause, but they came to different conclusions. Still other colonists remained neutral throughout the struggle, focusing on personal matters or simply not caring who ultimately governed them.
In addition, people in the colonies came to their own differing conclusions at varying times. Sailors and shop owners in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia as well as backwoods farmers in western Pennsylvania, Virginia, and the Carolinas were sometimes much more ready for revolution, much sooner, than their better-known leaders.
For African slaves, the growing spirit of revolution held both potential and danger. Some slaves and free blacks saw in the revolutionary rhetoric the possibility of their own freedom. In contrast, other African-Americans saw the British government as a potential protector and even liberator against slave owners who embraced the patriot cause. Potential for freedom was not a guarantee in any scenario, however.
Ihe Iroquois, Cherokee, and other Indian tribes knew that frontier whites had little use for the king’s ban on white settlement and, if freed from British authority, would stream west. As the possibility of expanded settlement fueled revolutionary fervor among frontier whites, it also fed fears among Indians, most of whom sided with the British after 1776.
In effect, during the 15 fateful years that John Adams described above, many different groups of people with wide-ranging hopes and fears considered the possibility of an American Revolution and arrived at different conclusions. Each of these groups fought their own revolutions, sometimes in alliance with each other, sometimes acting at cross-purposes. Far from being clear, the goals and tactics of the revolutionaries were an ever-changing patchwork as different groups fought for their own purposes and made shifting alliances.
Loyalists
The name given to those in the colonies— perhaps one-fifth to one-third of the total population—who supported the British and opposed American independence.
Transition from the "Rights of Man" to Revolt
Many residents of the British colonies had grown up reading John Lockes defense of Britain’s Glorious Revolution of 1689. Long before tensions between the colonies and the government in London reached a crisis, colonists believed, as Locke said, that the people always retained “a supreme power to remove or alter the legislative” authority when they wanted to. Throughout the 1770s, Locke’s ideas guided some of the Revolution’s most articulate advocates such as Ihomas Jefferson, John Adams, and Benjamin Franklin as well as backwoods rebels like Ethan Allen, a man of modest
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 125
republicanism
, A complex, changing body of ideas, values, and - assumptions that held that self-government
by the citizens of a country, or their representatives, provided a more reliable foundation for good society and individual freedom than rule by kings or any other distant elite.
education who was the leader of Vermont’s Green Mountain Boys. Using Locke’s arguments in their speeches and lawsuits, they taunted royal governors, and ultimately, they used Lockes ideas to justify armed resistance.
Revolutionary leaders also read and cited French philosophers Voltaire, Rousseau, and Montesquieu—and authors from ancient Greece and Rome, all of whom advocated a commitment to liberty and the need to overthrow unjust authorities. Leaders of the patriot cause became convinced that England represented the evils of empire while the colonists represented the virtues of republicanism, which supported a broad distribution of power to people, enabling them to determine how and by whom they would be governed.
Leaders on both sides of the Atlantic, those who argued for independence and those who argued to maintain the ties between Britain and the American colonies, all read the same literature. Nearly all of them believed that George III ruled only by the consent of Parliament, not from any sort of divine right. For a hundred years before the American Revolution, British subjects in the old and new worlds constituted a community of people who valued “the rights of Englishmen” and distrusted efforts to undermine those rights. When, in 1776, Thomas Jefferson wrote that the colonies had a right to independence because it was a self-evident truth that “all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights,” he was reflecting a way of thinking that was familiar in America and Britain.
Those who shared common ideas about rights, liberty, and freedom extended beyond just residents of Britain and North America. The world that was at war in the 1750s and 1760s became a world involved in revolution in the 1770s and 1780s and beyond. Although the government of the King Louis XVI of France would play an essential role in the American victory, Louis XVI himself would lose his throne and his head to a French revolution within the next decade. The French and American Revolutions led to further revolutionary efforts across much of Europe as people in Germany, Poland, Scandinavia, and Italy attempted their own revolutions. Future president James Madison wrote in 1792 that “America has set the example and France has followed it, of charters of power granted by liberty.”
Madison did not, however, mention another revolution that was much closer to the United States than those in Europe. In 1791, slaves in the French colony of Saint Domingue (modern Haiti) rebelled. Saint Domingue was one of the richest and most oppressive slave systems in the world, where some 500,000 African slaves grew sugar and coffee that made the 40,000 French owners very rich. A free black, Toussaint L Overture—who quoted the same philosophers as North American revolutionaries— led the rebels in Haiti to win a series of victories. L’Overture himself was captured and died in France, but a new free Republic of Haiti was proclaimed in 1804. The rebellion was the most successful slave revolt in history and another in a long line of revolutions against distant authorities.
In addition, not long after the American Revolution, between 1810 and 1826, most of Latin America expelled its Spanish and Portuguese colonial masters. Simon Bolivar led revolutionary movements in his native Venezuela and helped establish the Republics of Columbia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. His 1812 Manifesto of Cartagena expressed the same philosophical ideas as those of his counterparts in North America and Europe. The American Revolution, then, was part of a worldwide revolution against distant authorities and old ideas, and it was based on a new philosophical understanding of “the rights of man” and the way the world should be organized.
126 Partlll A New Birth of Fr
The Accompanying Revolution in Religion
In 1740, a Presbyterian minister, Gilbert Tennent, one of the leaders of the Great Awakening (see Chapter 4), preached a sermon on “The Danger of an Unconverted Ministry in churches throughout New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Tennent’s sermon, with its plea to test the personal faith of ministers, was a direct challenge to the leaders Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800


of the major Protestant denominations—Presbyterian, Congregational, and Episcopal. As a result of the Great Awakening, church members claimed permission—indeed, the responsibility—to judge their ministers. It was not a great leap for citizens to claim the same permission, and responsibility, for judging those in civil authority.
One visiting revivalist asserted that Patrick Henry, rector of the Episcopal church in Hanover, Virginia (and uncle to the patriot leader Patrick Henry), was a “stranger to true religion.” Reverend Henry, in return, demanded that Virginia’s governor stop these “strolling preachers” who were, in his view, “a set of incendiaries, enemies not only to the Established Church, but also common disturbers of the peace.” In a way, Henry was right. The Great Awakening disturbed the peace, split churches, and undermined all authorities.
Seaport Radicalism—From the Stamp Act to the Boston Massacre and Boston Tea Party
The Boston Tea Party of 1773 was probably the most famous act of resistance in America before the Revolution, but it was far from the first. Between 1747 and 1774, dockworkers, sailors, and townspeople drove the leading British officials—customs officials, navy officers, and even governors—away from the docks and out of Boston five times. Similar acts of rebellion took place from New York to the Carolinas.
Impressment had been British navy policy for centuries and, since the 1690s, had been a source of riots in colonial ports. When a warship was short of sailors, which happened often due to high rates of death and desertion, the captain had the authority to impress (or kidnap) likely sailors from merchant ships or ports and sign them up for naval service. Commercial sailors were paid higher wages than those in the navy and often had better working conditions, so impressments were, as one senior British naval officer noted, a source of “Hatred for the King’s Service . . . [and] a Spirit of Rebellion,” for many who lived along the waterfront.
In November 1747, British Commodore Charles Knowles sent sailors in search of new recruits while his ship was in Boston Harbor. They impressed 46 men into service. A rebellious crowd responded, taking some of Knowles’s officers hostage and chasing the royal governor out of town. A successful brewer, Samuel Adams, defended the rioters as an “Assembly of People drawn together upon no other Design than to defend themselves and repel the Assaults of a Press-Gang.” He insisted that they “had a natural right” to do so. Perhaps his cousin, John Adams, should have considered an earlier date than 1760 for the start of revolutionary thinking in the colonies.
British actions in the 1760s and 1770s escalated tensions in North American cities. The British government desperately needed to pay off the debt from the French and Indian War and attempted to do so, in part, by imposing new taxes. With each attempt—the Sugar and Currency Acts of 1764, the Stamp Act of 1765, the Townshend duties of 1767, and the Tea Act of 1773—colonial resistance grew. In a spiraling series of encounters, Parliament sought to raise funds, backed off in the face of colonial resistance, and then enacted new “get tough” policies that also backfired (see Table 5-1). The impact of the persistent but failed efforts to raise taxes fueled colonial resistance and the sense that resistance was effective. The taxes seemed fair only to those in Britain who were in power. The colonists saw each tax as a new attack on their liberty and each British effort at compromise as a sign of weakness.
The Sugar Act of 1764, the first tax, and the Currency Act of 1764 provoked limited but spirited resistance. The tax on sugar included rum and molasses, both made from sugar. The Currency Act prohibited colonies from issuing their own paper money as legal tender for either public debts, including paying taxes, or private debts, including paying merchants for goods made in Britain. In response, merchants and artisans in New York and Boston joined in a nonimportation movement in 1764 that was the beginning of a growing refusal to buy or use anything manufactured in Britain.
Impressment
The British policy of forcibly enlisting sailors into the British navy against their will. It had long been a source of resentment toward the British government in port towns.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 127
Name of Act
The Sugar Act of 1764
The Currency Act of 1764
The Stamp Act of 1765
The Declaratory Act of 1766 The Revenue Act of 1766
The second Revenue Act of 1767 (also known as the Townshend duties after Charles Townshend, chancellor of the Exchequer)
The Tea Act of 1773
TABLE 5-1 Parliamentary Acts that Fueled Colonial Resistance
Description
Increased duties and strengthened collection of customs on rum and molasses, which particularly affected merchants and importers
Prohibited the colonies from issuing their own paper money as legal tender for public or private debts to Britain
Taxed all legal and commercial documents, creating an immediate hardship for business leaders and building resentment in many ports where people depended on those businesses for jobs Repealed the Stamp Act but said Parliament could legislate for the colonies in "all cases Whatsoever" Restricted trade in sugar, which helped British and Caribbean merchants at the expense of North American merchants
Placed new duties on paper, lead, paint, glass, and tea. All but the tax on tea were repealed in 1770—the same day as the Boston Massacre.
The "Intolerable Acts" of 1774
Allowed the British East India Company to ship tea to the colonies without having to pay normally required duties, making it cheaper than most smuggled tea. The Townshend tea tax would still apply once it reached the colonies. The Act supported the East India Company, almost bankrupt because so many customers were purchasing cheaper, smuggled tea from elsewhere.
Parliament's response to the tea riots; they closed the port of Boston, expanded the royal governor's authority, shifted control of the Ohio River country to the British governor in Quebec (the Quebec Act), and allowed British troops to use any uninhabited building as a barracks, without the owner's authorization (the Quartering Act).
Sons of Liberty
Secret organizations in the colonies formed to oppose the Stamp Act. From 1765 until independence, members spoke, wrote, and took direct action against British measures especially the Stamp Tax and the tax on tea.
128 Part III A Nev^g^of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
A year later, resistance to the Stamp Act of 1765 was stronger, and it united colonists of many social classes. The act required legal and commercial documents, including magazines, newspapers, and playing cards to be printed on special paper showing an official stamp. Payment for the stamped paper had to be in British currency. In the spring of 1765, Patrick Henry asked Virginias legislature, the House of Burgesses, to pass resolutions that came to be known as the Virginia Resolves opposing the tax. Middling and upper-class New Yorkers—including lawyers and merchants who would have had to pay the highest taxes if the law was enforced—began writing articles against the tax in the city’s many newspapers, which circulated widely. Some also formed a new secret organization, the Sons of Liberty, which sent delegates to all the colonies to create a kind of underground resistance to the tax—a tax they described as a sign of British tyranny. Nine colonies sent delegates to a gathering known as the Stamp Act Congress in New York City in October 1765. There they issued a Declaration of Rights and Grievances, which said that Parliament had no right to tax the colonies, and they petitioned for a repeal of the Stamp and Sugar Acts.
More important than the petition was the fact that leaders of the growing resistance movement met together and began to sense their unity. As one of the organizers of the congress said, There ought to be no New England men, no New Yorker, etc. known on the Continent, but all of us Americans.” This appeal to unity was a new sentiment in colonies that had, up until now, jealously guarded their independence from each other. Britain s parliamentary action had provoked this increasing unity.
While colonial leaders met and wrote petitions, some of the strongest resistance to the stamp tax developed in the working-class taverns where laborers and sailors gathered. Poor people had little reason to actually pay the tax because they did not use many legal documents or paper products that would require the stamped paper, but the tax was a symbol of British arrogance and threatened to slow the colonial economy, which could put sailors and laboring people out of work. To the poor, the haughty British authorities were becoming intolerable.
When Lieutenant Governor Cadwallader Colden placed the embossing stamps in Fort George at the tip of Manhattan—until the new tax went into effect on November 1, 1765, public protests mounted into what came to be known as the New York Stamp Act Riot. New York merchants and groups like the Sons of Liberty
agreed not to import any British goods while the Stamp Act was in force.
In taverns across the city, angry citizens shared their discontent with the British. On the evening of November 1, a crowd paraded around the city with torches as well as effigies of the lieutenant governor and the devil. They dared the British troops to fire on them and burned Coldens coach. Next, the crowd broke into the home of Major James of the Royal Artillery, drank his considerable supply of liquor, and burned the house.
Calling themselves the Sons of Neptune to distinguish themselves from the more middle class Sons of Liberty, the crowd resisted efforts to end the violence. Months later, when news reached New York in May 1766 that the Stamp Act had been repealed, celebrating crowds fired guns, broke windows, and erected a “liberty pole” to taunt British authorities.
Similar riots by the “lower sorts” took place in other colonial cities.
In Boston, a mob ransacked the governor’s home, and in Annapolis,
Maryland, a crowd burned the stamp distributor’s warehouse and forced him to flee the colony. In Wilmington, North Carolina, a mocking, angry crowd paraded the stamp collector through the streets. And in Charleston, South Carolina, a crowd of workers and seamen burned effigies of the stamp distributor.
In response to the unrest, British authorities under the new prime minister, the Marquess of Rockingham, decided to repeal the Stamp and Sugar taxes but also to show force. In 1766, while repealing the taxes, Parliament also voted the Declatory Act, which claimed its right to tax and regulate the colonies “in all cases Whatsoever.” In addition, Parliament passed the Revenue Act of 1766, restricting trade in sugar, which helped British and Caribbean merchants at the expense of colonial merchants.
A year later, Charles Townshend, chancellor of the Exchequer (treasurer) in a new British government, imposed new taxes on lead, paint, paper, and tea, known as the second Revenue Act of 1767 (also known as the Townshend duties of 1767). The new British government was desperate to find a way to pay off the war debt but also wanted to assert Parliament’s authority over the colonies. In particular, Parliament
wanted to curtail smuggling by some of the most prosperous colonial merchants and to control the mobs that kept rioting in Boston and New York. In September 1768, the warships of the Royal Navy arrived in Boston, and British troops marched through town in a show of the government’s authority. According to Paul Revere, the troops “Formed and Marched with insolent Parade, Drums beating, Fifes playing, and Colours flying, up King Street.” The presence of so many troops created a sense of siege in Boston.
A year and a half later, British soldiers were still stationed in Boston, creating constant tensions with residents who resented their presence. One source of the tension was the fact that off-duty soldiers were allowed to work on their own part-time, increasing competition with colonists for jobs by accepting lower wages. On the evening of March 5, 1770, an angry crowd began to throw snowballs at British soldiers. They taunted the lone British sentry at the State House, Private Hugh White. As the crowd around White grew, more people joined in the taunting or watched from the sidelines. John Adams called the crowd “a motley rabble,” but they had strong support in a city tired of the presence of so many soldiers.
British Captain Thomas Preston sent more soldiers to support White while the crowd grew to 300 or 400. Preston asked the crowd to disperse, assuring them that the soldiers would not fire since he himself was standing directly in front of them. However, someone threw something that knocked one of the soldiers down, and some of the soldiers started firing, even though no one heard Preston give any orders. Three men were killed—including a seaman, Crispus Attacks, a former slave who was part African and part American Indian and who would be celebrated as the first man and first black
Hs.	...tut’M I’’ ‘‘V	-x<-
This picture, titled "The Bostonians Paying the Excise-Man," shows many forms of resistance to British taxes that developed, including the mob actions that sometimes coated an offending tax collector with tar and feathers or forced him to drink boiling tea. In the background, a Liberty Tree—symbol of freedom—sports a hangman's noose, and colonists dump tea off a ship.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 129
Boston Massacre
After months of increasing friction between townspeople and the British troops stationed in the city, on March 5,1770, British troops fired on American civilians in Boston who were throwing projectiles at them, killing five and stirring even greater hatred toward the British army.
Daughters of Liberty
Organized as a women's response to the Sons of Liberty, the Daughters opposed British measures, avoided British taxed tea, spun their own yarn, and wove their own cloth to avoid purchasing British goods.
In this print, designed to fuel hostility toward the British more than provide an accurate record, Paul Revere showed the British soldiers— more organized than they actually were—firing on a helpless crowd.
person to die in the Revolution. Two more later died of their wounds. The Boston Massacre, as colonists called it, fueled anger at the British authorities. To avoid further confrontation, the Royal Governor pulled the troops out of Boston. His action also left most of the town in the hands of an increasingly anti-British population.
Some of the British troops involved were accused of murder. John Adams defended them in a subsequent trial (in which they were found not guilty). Later, Adams said that his defense of the soldiers, though highly unpopular, was, “one of the most gallant, generous, manly and disinterested Actions of my whole Life. Nevertheless, Adams also said that there was “no Reason why the Town should not call the Action of that Night a Massacre.” Paul Revere described the event as a deliberate military attack on a peaceful crowd. Sam Adams created a “committee of correspondence” to encourage resistance in other colonies. With such rhetoric, many Bostonians would likely never again be loyal British subjects.
In 1773, Britain decided to maintain the tax on tea, but repeal the other Townshend duties. The Tea Act of 1773 not only asserted Parliament’s authority to levy whatever taxes it wished but also attempted to protect the almost-bankrupt British East India Company, which was struggling because customers were purchasing cheaper, smuggled tea elsewhere. Under the act, the East India Company could ship large quantities of tea to the colonies without paying required duties, making the tea cheaper for the colonists, even with the Townshend tea tax. The plan was to encourage colonists to buy the taxed British East India Company tea instead of smuggled teas.
Given the tension and anger in Boston, the city’s response could easily have been predicted. City residents had no intention of paying that tax, even on discounted tea. In New York, Philadelphia, and Charleston, patriotic groups, often led by the Sons of Liberty, convinced merchants not to allow the tea to land from the British ships. “No taxation without representation,” became the rallying cry from colonists who were fed up with having no say in matters that affected them.
In November 1773, a shipment of British tea arrived in Boston on the ship Dartmouth. Even before it arrived, crowds had forced the tea merchants to barricade themselves in their warehouse. Once the Dartmouth appeared, a crowd forced the ship to move to Griffin’s Wharf where dockworkers, sailors, and merchants, not the British authorities, controlled the dock. The customs commissioners fled rather than risk getting tarred and feathered, an increas-
ingly popular punishment by patriotic crowds for those who supported royal authority. Governor Thomas Hutchinson would not let the Dartmouth sail back to England, and the crowd would not let the tea be unloaded. Ihe stand-off lasted into December.
On December 16, angry citizens met at the Old South Meeting House. When the governor would not back down, Samuel Adams said, “This meeting can do nothing more to save the country.” The crowd’s response—probably well rehearsed—was a series of faked Indian war whoops, a shout of “Boston harbor a tea-pot tonight,” and a call to gather at Griffin’s Wharf. As thousands watched from the shore, men, slightly disguised as Mohawks, boarded the Dartmouth and dumped the tea into Boston Harbor.
Ihe Boston Tea Party galvanized anti-British sentiment in other colonies, and the city was seen as the incubator of revolutionary activity long before the next shots were fired. In response to the incident, the British closed the port of Boston to all shipping, creating a financial crisis that led to further anger and unrest among not only dock-workers but also the merchant elites who depended on the port for their wealth.
Women, too, became increasingly involved in leading their own protests. In response to the Stamp Act crisis of 1765, small groups of women who were determined to boycott British goods in protest began calling themselves the Daughters of Liberty. New England women organized spinning bees to make their own cloth so they could avoid buying English textiles. Among the elite and working people, wearing homespun clothing
J30
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800 A
British publication ridiculed American women's efforts to boycott tea, but the hostility shown in the cartoon reflects the degree to which women's protests were effective. became a symbol of loyalty to the patriot cause. Their efforts continued to strengthen and spread, especially with the strong support they got from newspapers. In 1774, 51 women in Edenton, North Carolina, promised not to consume English goods, including tea, and other women organized similar boycotts elsewhere. When war broke out after 1775 and many goods became scarce, women protested when colonial merchants hoarded goods or demanded higher prices. In 1777, women in Poughkeepsie, New York, broke into the house of a merchant they thought was hoarding goods. As the war continued, women led food riots throughout the colonies.
Revolts in the Back Country
Rural people on the frontier from New York to the Carolinas were also taking matters into their own hands, but for different reasons. Backcountry Virginians had rebelled in various ways against royal authority since Bacons Rebellion in 1676, and in all of the colonies, major splits reflected gaps between coastal areas that had more access to, and more representation in, colonial governments than rural inland settlements.
In the mid-1760s, feeling ignored and cheated by what they saw as distant and corrupt coastal authorities, farmers in the western regions of North and South Carolina created what they called the Regulator movement. In South Carolina, Regulators attacked when gangs of outlaws stole from isolated farms. The governor eventually agreed to create circuit courts in the back country, which diminished the violence. In North Carolina, the movement protested corrupt practices of sheriffs and court
officials who forced settlers to pay illegally high taxes and legal fees. Regulators rallied settlers, who refused to pay the taxes, closed the courts, and attacked officials. The governor sent in state militia from the coastal areas, and in their largest encounter with the Regulators, 29 people were killed and 150 wounded.
Throughout the colonies, however, the most contentious issue for inland communities was relationships with Indian tribes. Inland people complained that those on the coast used inland settlers as a buffer from the Indians. In Pennsylvania, there were also ethnic splits between the regions. Pennsylvania’s mostly English Quaker elite had settled around Philadelphia. As pacifists, they tried to maintain peaceful relations with the Indians. But between the Quakers and the Indians was a zone inhabited by Scots-Irish and Germans who did not share the pacifism of the Quakers and who found themselves much closer to potential Indian hostility.
The rapid growth of the white population exacerbated the conflicts between frontier whites and Indians. The ever-increasing pressure for more land, a lot more land, could be satisfied only by white movement into areas that belonged to Indian tribes. As whites encroached, attacks by Indians increased. Settlers wanted, and expected, the British to protect them. But after 1763, King Georges Proclamation Line halted further movement west—at least legally. Ihe British-imposed barrier caused intense anger on the frontier.
British agents sought to not only relieve the pressure among land-hungry white settlers but also honor the king’s commitment to the Indians. A 1768 treaty allowed white settlement in present-day West Virginia and Kentucky. A similar treaty opened parts of western Pennsylvania and New York to white settlement. But colonists wanted much more land than these treaties gave them and were prepared to fight to get it— whether with Indian tribes or with the king s representatives.
Violence extended all along the lines of settlement. A German immigrant, Frederick Stump, was arrested for murdering 10 Indians in western Pennsylvania in 1768 and then freed from jail by a white mob. In Virginia, vigilantes who called themselves the Augusta Boys killed Cherokees.
General Thomas Gage, the senior British commander in North America, found the situation intolerable. He complained to London that, “all the people of the frontiers
Chapter5 The Making of a Revolution 131
5.2
First Continental Congress
Meeting of delegates from most of the colonies and held in Philadelphia in 1774 in response to the British efforts to tax the colonies.
Somerset Decision
A 1772 ruling by Britain's Lord Chief Justice in the case of James Somerset that set him free and essentially declared slavery illegal in England, though not in British colonies.

■RnBnBSMMMHi
Phillis Wheatley lived an unusual life for an African slave. Before she was given her freedom, she was given considerable opportunity to learn and to write by the Wheatley family that claimed her.
Her poems reflected the yearning for freedom that all colonists felt, but specifically the hopes of enslaved Africans among them.
from Pennsylvania to Virginia inclusive, openly avow, that they never find a man guilty of murder, for killing an Indian.” In response to the frontier resistance, Parliament passed the Quebec Act of 1774, assigning all lands north and west of the Ohio River to the British-controlled Province of Quebec. That action effectively took Indian policy out of the hands of frontier agitators or royal governors along the coast. The Quebec Act also recognized the legal rights of the Catholic Church, which deeply offended the overwhelmingly Protestant Americans. Colonists saw the Quebec Act as one of what they called the Intolerable Acts, a series of laws that included the act that closed the port of Boston until the price of the tea and the tax on it was paid, a revision of the colonial charter of Massachusetts, and a Quartering Act that allowed governors to place troops in any uninhabited building. Patriots insisted that because Parliament was enacting these laws with no representation from colonists, Britain was violating the rights of English subjects in North America. Parliaments actions, including closing the port of Boston and challenging frontier farmers, were unintentionally provoking a common sense of grievance among people who had previously been quite separate in their complaints.
Growing Unity in the Colonies—The First Continental Congress
While people began to organize and challenge British authorities from Virginia to Massachusetts, leaders of the rebellion in Massachusetts asked the other colonies to join it in united action against what they saw as British tyranny. All of them except Georgia— which was fighting Creek Indians and wanted Britain’s support—sent delegates to Philadelphia in September 1774 to what became known as the First Continental Congress.
Most of the delegates who came to Philadelphia agreed that Parliament had no right to tax the colonies without their consent. The delegates also sought unified opposition to the British treatment of Boston. However, few were ready for a break with Britain. The Virginians wanted to continue to export tobacco, and South Carolina depended on the export of rice and indigo. Finding common ground was not easy. But the delegates did gain experience working together, even when they argued—which they did a lot.
There was little talk of war or independence at the 1774 gathering. But before they adjourned on October 26, the delegates declared that their rights were based on the laws of nature, the British constitution, and the colonial charters, and were not to be trifled with. They also agreed to a ban on British imports to take effect in December 1774, a ban on exports that would take effect in September 1775 (after the tobacco and rice crops were safely on their way to Britain), and—for symbolic reasons—an immediate ban on the consumption of tea from the East India Company. They agreed to meet again in May 1775 if relations with Britain did not improve.
Talk of Freedom for Slaves
For African slaves in British North America, the most revolutionary moment of the 1700s took place in London in July 1772. An American slave named James Somerset had been taken from Virginia to England as a personal servant by his master Charles Stewart. In London, Somerset became friends with free blacks and white abolitionists. In October 1771, he ran away. He was caught and put on a ship bound for Jamaica. But Somersets white friends petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus, requiring that Somerset be brought before a judge to determine whether he was imprisoned lawfully. They insisted that he was held against his will—which, like all slaves, he certainly was. Eventually, the Lord Chief Justice ruled that since Parliament had never legalized slavery in England itself, as opposed to the English colonies, Somerset had to be freed because “the state of slavery is of such a nature, that it is incapable of being introduced on any reason, moral or political; but only by positive law.” This decision basically ended slavery in England itself.
The Somerset decision caused a considerable stir in the colonies and in Britain. In September 1773, the Virginia Gazette noted that, as news of the decision spread, running away to England was a notion now too prevalent among the Negroes, greatly
132
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
American Voices
Phillis Wheatley, Poem to the Earl of Dartmouth, 1773
Phillis Wheatley was born in West Africa in 1753. She was captured at age seven or eight and brought to Boston as a slave where she was purchased by John and Susanna Wheatley, who provided her with a good education. The young Phillis was moved by English poets, Christianity, and the talk of democracy that she heard in upper-class Boston in the 1760s and 1770s— which, she believed, applied to slaves as well as free people. In response, she wrote poems about religion, slavery, and freedom, including this one titled, "To The Right Honorable William, Earl of Dartmouth, His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for North America, &c." She was allowed to travel to London to see some of her poems published in 1773 and was later freed on the eve of the American Revolution. She died in 1784.
No more, America, in mournful strain Of wrongs, and grievance unredress'd complain,
No longer shalt thou dread the iron chain,
Which wanton Tyranny with lawless hand Had made, and with it meant t'enslave the land.
Should you, my lord, while you peruse my song,
Wonder from whence my love of Freedom sprung,
Whence flow these wishes for the common good,
By feeling hearts alone best understood,
I, young in life, by seeming cruel fate
Was snatch'd from Afric's fancy'd happy seat:
What pangs excruciating must molest,
What sorrows labour in my parent's breast?
Steel'd was that soul and by no misery mov'd That from a father seiz'd his babe belov'd;
Such, such my case. And can I then but pray Others may never feel tyrannic sway?
Source: Phillis Wheatley, "To The Right Honorable William, Earl of Dartmouth,
His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for North America, &c,"in Herb Boyd, editor, Autobiography of a Peop/e (New York: Anchor Books, 2001, pp. 29-30.)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Wheatley connect her personal experiences to the revolutionary cause?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light does this poem shed on Wheatley's hopes for the coming revolution? How might her vision of revolution have differed from that of her white Bostonian neighbors?
to the vexation and prejudice of their masters.” Benjamin Franklin, who was living in London, had once owned slaves, but now, like many others, he was turning against the institution, calling it “this pestilential detestable traffic in the bodies and souls of men.” In Massachusetts, after successfully defending a slave in a trial to obtain his freedom in the Nantucket Court of Common Pleas, John Adams said, “I never knew a jury by a verdict to determine a negro to be a slave. They always found him free.”
Legal challenges were not the main ways in which slaves sought freedom before and during the American Revolution, however. Slaves heard about the protests of the Stamp Act and saw how effective mob action was. Some 107 slaves ran away from a plantation near Charleston to join other runaways who were creating their own communities in hard-to-penetrate swamps.
Whites on both sides of the Atlantic noted the absurdity of colonists protesting their own perceived enslavement by Parliament while, as one wrote, those same colonists enslaved “thousands of tens of thousands of their fellow creatures!” The most consistent voice for abolition in the 1760s and 1770s came from the Quakers, who made it mandatory for members of their denomination to free their slaves or allow them to purchase their freedom. Others such as Virginias Arthur Lee—from a great slaveholding family in the colony—wrote that “freedom is unquestionably the birthright of all mankind, of Africans as well as Europeans.” In the 1700s, the slave trade was still a profitable institution. While some whites wrote anti-slavery letters and pamphlets, 7,000 slaves were imported into Charleston in 1765. The debate around slavery was as heated as the debate around British rule, and no one living through these years could fail to notice the contradiction of fighting for liberty and enforcing slavery.
5.2
Quick Review Did Americans' revolutionary ideas contradict their attitudes towards Indians and slaves? To answer this question, consider the time and context in which the American Revolution took place.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 133
THE WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE
5.3
Explain how political and military strategy, support for the patriot cause, and American alliances with France and Spain led to an American victory in the war for independence.
As talk of rebellion spread in 1774, not long after the Boston Tea Party, John Adams overheard rural farmers discussing the events in Boston. One insisted, “If parliament can take away Mr. Hancocks wharf and Mr. Rowe’s wharf, they can take away your barn and my house.” Adams realized that if isolated farmers were agreeing with a mob in Boston, revolution was possible. Indeed, battles would soon break out in Lexington and in Concord, starting the American Revolution. At the same time, word was quickly spreading among Africans regarding the disputes about slavery. They were poised to take action to support either the colonists or the British—whichever side would benefit them the most. Beginning in 1775, what had been occasional mob actions turned into outright warfare as increasingly well-disciplined colonial militia fought against the British army. While some colonial leaders met in Congress and declared independence in 1776, other colonists, later aided by French forces, fought a long and bitter series of battles that won the actual independence that had been declared.
From Lexington and Concord to Bunker Hill—Revolt Becomes War
General Thomas Gage also understood the growing rebellion. When Parliament passed the Intolerable Acts, Gage was charged with moving British troops back into Boston and allowing no trade until Massachusetts submitted to the crown (see Map 5-3). Gage recommended to London that efforts be made to conciliate the colonists. But the leaders in Parliament were in no mood for conciliation, and Gage received orders to restore order at all costs. As he moved his troops, Gage kept a close eye on the Massachusetts rebels who kept an equally close eye on him. Paul Revere, who had helped lead the Boston Tea Party, now led an informal group of unemployed artisans who noted every troop movement in Boston.
THE BATTLES OF LEXINGTON AND CONCORD, APRIL
1775 In the inland towns of Concord and Worcester, the colonial militia was collecting arms, and Gage knew it. Hoping for secrecy, he ordered troops to prepare to march to Concord to seize the arms. The colonists had been expecting such a move. Paul Revere was to report any troop movements by hanging lanterns in the steeple of the North Church—one lantern if the troops moved inland and “two if by sea,” meaning by boats across the Back Bay. When the British troops started to move, Revere had two lanterns hung in the steeple (the British took the water route). Then he and William Dawes began their famous rides through the night to alert the colonial militia. Revere himself was arrested by British troops, but Dawes woke Sam Adams and John Hancock, who made it to Concord to organize the militia. When the British reached Lexington Town Green at little after 4:30 a.m. on April 19, 1775, they were met by colonial militia. Shots were fired, killing eight militiamen and wounding 10 others. Only one British soldier was wounded in this first battle of the Revolution.
There was no further gunfire until the British entered the town of Concord where they found few arms. As they left to march the 16 miles back to Boston, militiamen hidden behind trees, buildings, rocks, and fences attacked their easy targets. At the end of the day, the British had 273 casualties, the militia 95. What had been unrest was now a war.
Word of the battles of Lexington and Concord spread quickly. Many shared Thomas Jefferson’s belief that “the last hopes of reconciliation” had now ended. People who were not sure about independence felt they had to make decisions. Some, perhaps as many as a third of all white colonists, remained loyal to the crown, though in New England they did so quietly. But many began to commit to what they saw as a patriotic cause, some even taking matters into their own hands. Ethan Allen, who, since
134 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
gHi British-ruled providence of Quebec, 1774 • - Boundary set by Quebec Act of 1774 EZ3 British-ruled providence of East Florida
t...I British-ruled providence of West Florida
! Reserved to Indians under British Rule
I
Spanish Louisiana Major battles
Distribution of British troops___________
British posts 100-300 soldiers British posts 300-500 soldiers British post 4,800 soldiers
The spread of news concerning the battles of Lexington and Concord, April 19, 1775 ▲ Within 1-7 days
A
Within 8-14 days A More than 14 days 5.1
53
53

MAP 5-3 British Courts and Troops Stationed in the Colonies as the Revolution Began. As unrest grew in the colonies, British authorities made every effort to assert control. They stationed more troops in all of the colonies, especially in restive Boston, and established a series of courts—Vice-Admiralty Courts—in Charleston, Philadelphia, Boston, and Halifax, Nova Scotia. Stationing more troops and clamping down on smuggling did nothing to end colonial resistance and, as word spread of the battles of Lexington and Concord after April 19,1775, colonial resistance only grew.
1770 had led his Green Mountain Boys in challenging royal authority in Vermont, and Benedict Arnold of Connecticut, then on the rebels’ side, organized their own militia and captured Fort Ticonderoga on Lake Champlain on May 10,1775. The cannons from the fort would play a large role in the coming struggle.
FROM THE BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL TO THE FORMATION OF THE COLONIAL
army In the weeks after the battles at Lexington and Concord, the Massachusetts militia, fortified with recruits from Connecticut, began to dig in on the hills surrounding British-occupied Boston—Dorchester Heights to the south, Bunker Hill, and Breeds Hill to the north. Colonel William Prescott of the Massachusetts militia was put in charge of fortifying the northern hills. Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 135
General Gage again felt that he had to act. On June 17, Gage ordered an attack on Breed’s Hill. It was a British victory, but at a high cost—226 British dead and 828 wounded compared with 140 militia killed and 271 wounded. As one Englishman remarked, If we have eight more such victories, there will be nobody left to bring the news.
Ihe battle, which later became known as the Battle of Bunker Hill, even though it had taken place on Breeds Hill, had been between ill-organized militia and regular units of the British army. After that battle, however, the American forces became better organized and gained support from all 13 colonies.
African-Americans in the Armies of Both Sides
The outbreak of war opened a new avenue to freedom for American slaves. While some, like Wheatley, embraced revolution for liberty and freedom, others heeded different words. Jeremiah, a free black in Charleston, heard the rumor that the British intended to “come to help the poor negroes.” He did not wait for that help but began to organize one of several slave uprisings in the Carolinas in 1775 and 1776. Jeremiahs ? plans for an insurrection were discovered, and he was hanged and burned at the stake ! in August 1775 by prorevolutionary authorities in South Carolina.
There was a good reason for the rumors among the slaves. In 1775, Lord Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia, under attack from the rebels, fled Williamsburg.
In November of that year, from his refuge on a British warship, he announced:
I do hereby further declare all indented servants, Negroes, or others.. .free, that are able and willing to bear arms, they joining His Majesty’s Troops as soon as may be.
The proclamation terrified whites. With it, the slaves’ perspective of the revolutionary struggle was transformed into a struggle about who would “give them their liberty.” And in South Carolina, where there were 80,000 slaves—60 percent of the population—such liberty would be a radical revolution indeed.
Many slaves responded to the invitation. Between 800 and 1,000 slaves joined the British army. Dunmore organized them into what he called the Ethiopian Regiment, whose members wore a sash reading “Liberty to Slaves.” In one engagement, an American colonel, Joseph Hutchings, was captured by two of his own former slaves. When the British landed on Staten Island in 1776, New York and New Jersey slaves joined them. When they Royal Navy sailed up rivers in Pennsylvania and Maryland, more slaves joined them, and when the British attacked Charleston, still more joined.
Runaway slaves built forts, tended the wounded, carried supplies, and fought alongside white soldiers. British generals understood that in recruiting slaves they were also disrupting the economies of the rebellious colonies. Although disease took a terrible toll among black soldiers and their families, and though many were captured and reenslaved, the loyalty of slaves to the British cause eventually brought freedom to some of them. Approximately 300 former slaves sailed with Dunmore when he left Virginia in 1776, and by the end of the war, British forces had relocated some 3,000 more in Canada or in colonies in West Africa.
The American army was much slower to enlist free blacks or slaves than the British. African-Americans, however, did serve among the colonial troops at Lexington and Concord in 1775, including Lemuel Haynes, who became one of the leading ministers in Massachusetts after the war.
Washington was reluctant to arm black soldiers, fearing not only the reaction of white troops but also the possibility that arms given to black soldiers might eventually support a slave revolt. Nevertheless, by the winter of 1777-1778, when things looked grim for the Revolution, Washington finally embraced black volunteers. Shortly after, in February 1778, Rhode Island offered freedom to “every able bodied Negro, Mulatto, or Indian Man slave in this state.. .to serve during the continuance of the present war with Great Britain.” Perhaps one in four male slaves in the state eventually enlisted in what was known as Rhode Island’s Black Regiment. Those who survived the war were given their freedom in 1783.
16 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Moving Toward Independence
When the delegates to the Second Continental Congress gathered as promised in Philadelphia on May 10, 1775, the Battles of Lexington and Concord had changed everything. They knew that they had to manage a war and attempted to create the Continental Army. The obvious choice to command it was George Washington, a respected member of Congress and veteran of the French and Indian War.
Washington took command of the colonial militia, such as it was, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on July 2, 1775, shortly after the Battle of Bunker Hill. American resistance would be more coordinated than it had been during the early skirmishes. Washington commanded between 9,000 and 14,000 troops—he was never sure—while Gage led about 5,000 in Boston. Despite the difference in numbers, the Royal Navy controlled the water, and Gage’s troops were highly disciplined soldiers. Washington’s troops were a ragtag army, capable of effective guerrilla fighting and great courage, but hard to discipline, easily bored, and ready to return to their homes if fighting dragged on.
After selecting Washington and beginning to find the money—mostly in foreign loans—to support an army, the Second Continental Congress turned to another pressing question: What did they want from the war? John Dickinson of Pennsylvania wanted reconciliation with Britain if Parliament would respect the rights of the colonists. John Adams and most of the Virginia delegates wanted independence. Others were not sure. It took a year for the debate to be resolved, and before then, other matters intervened.
THOMAS PAINE’S COMMON SENSE
While the Congress debated independence, a new arrival from England, Thomas Paine, published a pamphlet, Common Sense, in January 1776. Soon, over 100,000 copies were in circulation. Paine asked, “Why is it that we hesitate?.. .For God’s sake, let us come to a final separation... .The birthday of a new world is at hand.” Paine made two basic points: that monarchy was always a bad way for people to be governed and that the time was right to declare independence. With his passionate words and exquisite timing, Paine shaped public opinion. Common Sense appeared on the same day George III declared the North American colonies to be in a state of rebellion. The two events could not have contrasted more clearly. John Adams was no admirer of Paine or his pamphlet, which he saw as simple minded and needlessly antagonistic, though he agreed with its conclusion. Nevertheless, Adams said that he expected Common Sense to become the “common faith” of the new nation. Declaring Independence, 1776 On June 7,1776, after months of debate in the Congress, Richard Henry Lee, a delegate from Virginia, offered a motion:
Resolved.. .that these United Colonies are, and of a right ought to be, free and independent states, that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the state of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved.
John Adams immediately seconded the motion.
In the debate that followed, delegates led by John Dickinson opposed the resolution. Most of the delegates had likely come to this Congress with the hope of reconciliation, not with any plan for permanent separation. But the fighting with British troops and the influence of publications like Common Sense had changed many minds. Congress eventually agreed to delay a vote on independence until July 1 but to also appoint what became known as the Committee of Five—Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, Roger Sherman, and Robert Livingston-to draft a declaration in case Congress did vote for independence.
Jefferson, known for his skill with words, was chosen to write the first draft. Adams and Franklin, and ultimately the full Congress, made adjustments, which frustrated and hurt the sensitive Jefferson. The most important changes included removing
Recently arrived from England,Thomas Paine took up the patriot cause with a fervor that many more established colonists lacked. In his easy-to-read pamphlet, Common Sense, he attacked not only the British treatment of the colonies but also the very idea of monarchy. His words were significant in fanning the flames of the independence movement.
Second Continental Congress
An assemblage of delegates from all the colonies that convened in May 1775 that eventually declared independence, adopted the Articles of Confederation, and conducted the Revolutionary War.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 137
Jefferson’s passionate attack on the slave trade, which was hypocritical in light of the fact that Jefferson owned many slaves and made no move to free them. In addition, far too many of the others in the Congress had investments in the trade to accept Jefferson’s language anywhere in the document. However, no one suggested removing Jefferson’s assertion that the king “has endeavored to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages,” even when they all knew that it was whites on the frontiers who were invading Indian territory, and the king’s government was trying to keep the two apart. Those in Congress saw the frontier whites as essential supporters of the patriot cause and were in no mood to antagonize them.
The waiting period before the vote paid off. By July 1776, no one was willing to go on record as being opposed to independence. On July 2, a unanimous Congress voted for independence, and on July 4, they adopted a declaration of independence that began with these powerful words:
When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
The philosophical ideas that John Locke had used to defend England’s change in monarchs were now, a hundred years later, used to announce to the world that monarchy itself was being abolished in England’s former colonies. In Philadelphia, people celebrated with “bonfires and ringing bells, with other great demonstrations of joy.”
When word of the Declaration of Independence reached New York City, a mob of soldiers and residents celebrated by pulling down the statue of King George III that stood on lower Broadway. The metal was eventually melted down to make bullets for the revolutionary cause.
138 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
A crowd in New York tore down the statue of George III, Washington built up morale in the army by reading the Declaration to his troops, and the celebrations continued up and down the coast.
THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION A
year later, the Congress adopted a governing document for the new and fragile country they had created. In 1777, the Articles of Confederation created a national, though weak, government for what was now called the United States of America. Although 11 of the colonies ratified the Articles within a year, the last, Maryland, did not do so until 1781. Nevertheless, with the Articles of Confederation, states banded together in a formal—and ultimately successful—alliance to prosecute the war and govern the nation in the peace they hoped would follow. With the Declaration of Independence, the 13 different colonies declared themselves to be 13 independent states that agreed to work together for certain limited common purposes. Although they were committed to cooperate, especially in fighting for independence, the representatives were distrustful of centralized government. Under the Articles of Confederation, there would be no national executive or court system in the new nation. In addition, Congress could raise money through taxes only if every state agreed. Nevertheless, this government—really, an alliance of independent states more than anything that looked like a modern nation—was able to coordinate its fight and win the Revolution. Whether such a government could build a nation, however, remained to be seen. Articles of Confederation
Written document setting up the loose confederation of states that made up the first national government of the United States from 1781 to 1788.
5.3
George Washington and His Victorious Patchwork Army
The American Revolution was a long and bloody war between two strikingly different
armies. On one side were Washington’s patchwork Continental Army and various
rebel militias—later supported by troops from France and Spain. In the course of the
long war, some 200,000 of the 350,000 men who could have served participated in
some military activity, but the turnover was such that no more than 25,000 served
at any one time. Fighting against them was a corps of extremely well-trained British
troops, supported by organized units of Loyalist colonists (as many as 8,000 at the start
of the war and increasing as the war continued) and hired soldiers from Germany.
Ultimately, many factors led to the success of the ragtag rebels and their allies in their
battles with the British troops (see Map 5-4) and perhaps more important their ability
to survive in spite of the British effort to eliminate them as a fighting force.
Most of the revolutionary Minute Men who fought at Lexington and Concord (called Minute Men because they had pledged to be ready to fight on a minute’s notice) were farmers who owned their own weapons and knew how to shoot. In some of the early battles, the popular image of the “citizen soldier” may have been true as farmers and townspeople took up arms to defend their communities. But as the war continued, and as Washington and his officers created the kind of discipline necessary for an effective army, more and more of the early volunteers faded away, replaced by recently indentured servants, impoverished transients, or those who traded a jail cell for a uniform. A colonial officer called the troops, “a wretched motley Crew,” but Washington was an effective leader who never seemed to lose control when others started to panic, and he was deeply committed to the cause.
Despite being ill-trained, ill-fed, ill-clothed, and restless, these troops continued to fight, even after seeing the “horrors of battle... in all their hideousness,” as one soldier remembered. Surprisingly, these often forgotten men are who won the independence that others celebrated.
A few women also took a direct role in the war. Armies in the 1700s usually included women known as camp followers. Some were the wives of soldiers, who could not or would not leave their husbands. Others were single women seeking adventure or simply survival in army life and army rations. Camp followers carried water to the battlefield, fed and supported the troops, nursed the wounded, and occasionally fought in battles’ Mary Ludwig Hays, known as Molly Pitcher (for the water she carried),
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution
139
Overview of the Revolutionary War British victories Patriot victories
—.	
	
	RO <3
$	
	
	J	0
	-X
		,	\

k - ' °

MAP 5-4 Major Battles of the American Revolution. The Revolutionary War was fought all across British North America, not only in almost all of the 13 colonies along the Atlantic coast but well into British Canada and in the Mississippi River Valley.
also supposedly loaded her husband s cannon after he was wounded at the Battle of Monmouth in 1778. Deborah Sampson disguised herself as a man, joined the army, and fought for years until a doctor discovered her identity after she was wounded.
Washington understood that though his army could fight, it could not withstand a direct battle with British regulars. He told Congress that he needed to fight a defensive war and avoid any general action. For much of the war, his goal was not a decisive victory, but avoiding a decisive loss. The longer Washington was able to keep his army together and out of too many battles, the better the chance that the British would tire of the war. He knew how well-trained the British army was—having served in it—but he also expected that training and discipline had narrowed their conception of war and would give him the edge as long as his troops could use nontraditional tactics and avoid capture or defeat.
140 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
American Voices
Joseph Plumb Martin, Narrative of a Revolutionary Soldier, 1775-1783
Joseph Plumb Marin was a private in the American army through eight years of war. He saw few direct battles but many small skirmishes. Martin knew that his primary task was to survive and avoid capture. His humorous journal, written when he was 70 years old, makes clear that his greatest enemies were neglect and hunger.
I, the redoubtable hero of this Narrative, first made my appearance in this crooked, fretful world, upon the twenty-first day of November, in the year 1760....I remember the stir in the country occasioned by the stamp act, but I was so young that I did not understand the meaning of it; I likewise remember the disturbances that followed the repeal of the stamp act, until the destruction of the tea at Boston and elsewhere; I was then thirteen or fourteen years old, and began to understand something of the works going on... .Time passed smoothly on with me till the year 1774 arrived, the smell of war began to be pretty strong, but I was determined to have no hand in it, happen when it might; I felt myself to be a real coward. What—venture my carcass where bullets fly! That will never do for me... .1 was ploughing in the field about half a mile from home, about the twenty-first day of April [1775], when all of a sudden the bells fell to ringing, what the cause was we could not conjecture....During the winter of 1775-6, by hearing the conversation and disputes of the good old farmer politicians of the times, I collected pretty correct ideas of the contest between this country and the mother country, (as it was then called)....I felt more anxious than ever, if possible, to be called a defender of my country.
1777—Next morning, we joined the grand army near
Philadelphia, and the heavy baggage being sent back to the
rear of the army, we were obliged to put us up huts by laying up poles and covering them with leaves; a capital shelter from winter storms... .About this time the whole British army left the city, came out and encamped, or rather lay, on Chestnut-hill in our immediate neighborhood; we hourly expected an attack from them; we had a commanding position and were very sensible of it. We were kept constantly on the alert, and wished nothing more than to have them engage us, for we were sure of giving them a drubbing, being in excellent fighting trim, as we were starved and as cross and ill-natured as curs. The British, however, thought better of the matter, and after several days maneuvering on the hill, very civilly walked off into Philadelphia again. Starvation seemed to be entailed upon the army and every animal connected with it....
1780—Here was the army starved and naked, and there their country sitting still and expecting the army to do notable things while fainting from sheer starvation.
Source: Joseph Plumb Martin, A Narrative of the Adventures, Dangers, and Sufferings of a Revolutionary Soldier (originally published 1830 republished New York: Signet Classics, 2010.)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Martin characterize his own journey toward support of the revolutionary cause?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What does this passage suggest about the differences between the American and British armies?
5.3
THE BRITISH EVACUATE BOSTON
After the Battle of Bunker Hill, the British controlled Boston but were hemmed in there. Through the winter of 1775-1776, Washington commissioned a promising soldier, Henry Knox, a young Boston bookseller, as a colonel in the Continental Army and sent him and his men to move the guns captured at Fort Ticonderoga on sleds over snow-covered mountains to Boston. On the night of March 1, 1776, Washingtons troops assembled the guns on Dorchester Heights and then bombarded the city until March 17 when the British finally evacuated Boston. THE WAR IN THE NORTH—MANHATTAN, TRENTON, AND VALLEY FORGE
The victory in Boston was one of the few outright victories Washington would achieve. Washingtons goal, however, was to engage in more indirect strategies that would wear down the British while preserving his own limited troops. Just as the American Congress was declaring independence in Philadelphia in 1776, Sir William Howe, who had replaced Gage as the British commander, landed his army on Staten Island, across from Manhattan. Howe had some 32,000 troops, including 8,000 German mercenaries—essentially soldiers for hire—known as Hessians (since many were from the German province of Hesse). During the war, some 30,000 Hessians fought for the British, approximately a quarter of all of their soldiers. Hessian troops were
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 141
recruited, often by force, from among the poorest Germans, and German princes would rent them out as units, especially to the British. Many Hessians soldiers had little interest in the British cause, but had little choice except to fight for it. Washington had his own morale problems, but his soldiers were somewhat more willing to fight.
As the two sides watched each other, Washingtons troops dug fortifications to defend Brooklyn and Manhattan. In late August, Howe’s larger and better-trained force attacked Brooklyn. Rather than risk battle and capture at this point, Washington abandoned Brooklyn and brought all 9,500 of his troops across the East River to Manhattan on the night of August 30. When Howe attacked Manhattan in September, Washington again retreated. Throughout the early fall, Washington continued a retreat, and the British advanced through New Jersey. As they settled down for the winter, the British held most of New Jersey, while Washingtons army was across the Delaware River in Pennsylvania.
Then, on Christmas night of 1776, Washington and 2,400 troops made a daring raid across the Delaware River and captured Trenton, New Jersey. They also captured many Hessian soldiers, some of whom quickly joined the rebel side. In January, they would go on to successfully attack a British force in Princeton. By the winter of 1776-1777, Washington controlled southern New Jersey while the British held northern New Jersey and New York City, which they would control throughout the war.
In May 1777, British General John Burgoyne assembled a large army in Canada. His plan was to proceed down the Hudson River and smash the “unnatural Rebellion” in New York and New England. Initially, the plan went well. Burgoyne had some 8,300 men, including 3,000 German troops. He led his army across Lake Champlain, overran the Americans at Fort Ticonderoga, and continued south into New York’s Hudson River Valley, an exhausting effort that involved moving a large army with heavy supplies through dense forests. As he moved through the area, Burgoyne’s sometimes pompous pronouncements to colonists and the German troops’ inability to communicate with them bred additional colonial resentment and motivated fresh volunteers for the American cause.
In September 1777, near Saratoga, New York, Burgoyne’s army encountered American troops under the command of an experienced general, Horatio Gates, and Benedict Arnold (still on the American side, but soon to be caught negotiating a plan with the British to defect). The British were surprised that their bayonet charge could not break the American lines. Both armies suffered heavy losses, but neither won a decisive victory. Burgoyne’s army was now cut off from its winter quarters and, shortly after, was forced to negotiate. Some 5,800 British troops were captured and held as prisoners until the end of the war. The Battle of Saratoga, was a turning point for the colonial cause. It eliminated a significant British force, and it proved to the world— especially those in France and Spain who were watching the war closely—that the Americans could stand up to Britain’s toughest troops. As a result, American diplomats including Benjamin Franklin were able to negotiate an agreement with the French and later the Spanish to recognize the united colonies and provide military assistance.
The British wanted not only to split the colonies and, especially, to capture Washington and his army, but also to catch the members of the Continental Congress by overtaking Philadelphia where the Congress met. In September 1777, British troops captured Philadelphia, but the members of Congress escaped before the British arrived. Washington was able to block supplies into the city, and the following spring, the British abandoned Philadelphia, which remained in colonial hands for the rest of the war, though there were continued riots between patriots and Loyalists in the city.
Before the British left Philadelphia, however, the American forces had to survive perhaps their most difficult winter. Washington selected Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, 18 miles northwest from Philadelphia as a place to keep an eye on the British in the city. His army was exhausted, cold, and hungry, and they got colder and hungrier as the winter continued. For weeks, there was little to eat. In time, however, Washington was able to appoint commissary officers who found food and clothing for the soldiers. A Prussian
142 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
officer volunteering in the American cause, Baron von Steuben, began training the troops in close order drills. Von Steuben possessed expertise in military training and hoped to make a name, and a home, for himself in a free America. In addition, a French officer, the Marquis de Lafayette, was recruited to lead forces that harassed the British. By the time the British sailed out of Philadelphia, the American troops were better fed and clothed, better trained, and ready for new battles—preparation they would need in the next years.
In 1778, General Sir Henry Clinton replaced Howe, and a new British strategy took shape. Clinton ordered the Royal Navy to harass the colonists up and down the Atlantic coast and encouraged Britain’s Indian allies to attack frontier settlements. In addition, he sent the main British land force south to overrun the Carolinas and Georgia. If he could detach those three colonies, Clinton thought, the Revolution might crumble. After 1778, the major battles of the war would be in the colonies’ western and southern regions.
THE IMPORTANCE OF FRANCE AND SPAIN
The Revolution was won by the rebels for many reasons, including the key fact that France and Spain were willing to help. The two countries had their own reasons for wanting to embarrass the British and reduce Britain’s power on the world stage. In particular, both France and Spain wanted greater access to trade with North America, which was highly restricted as long as the British controlled the colonies. By the 1770s, the French still resented the British victory in the Seven Years’ War and wanted to ensure that France, not Britain, was the dominant power in Europe. As early as 1775, France sent agents to America to see what might be gained from assisting in the rebellion. Similarly, Spain started to supply the colonists with food and gunpowder from Spanish-held New Orleans and Cuba. While they were willing to support the rebellion, neither France nor Spain wanted to engage in war with Britain unless the colonists were serious. In arguing for a declaration of independence in 1776, Adams told the Congress: “Foreign powers cannot be expected to acknowledge us, till we have acknowledged ourselves and taken our station among them as a sovereign power, an independent nation.” He had two specific foreign powers in mind.
In 1776, Benjamin Franklin led an American delegation in Paris to seek further help. Franklin with his simple fur cap and plain spectacles, yet sophisticated manner, charmed the French. However, Franklin needed more than charm to win real help. With the Americans’ declared independence and victory over Britain’s troops at Saratoga, French leaders started to take him more seriously. His diplomatic efforts secured important supplies and, in February 1778, a full French alliance with the United States of America, the first diplomatic recognition of the new nation. A few months later, France formally declared war on Great Britain. For the rest of the war, Washington could count on the French army and navy to fight the British.
In 1779, Spain also declared war on Britain. Spanish forces moved up the Mississippi River from New Orleans and along the Gulf Coast and took the British forts at Baton Rouge, Natchez, Mobile, and Pensacola. Spanish attacks in the Mississippi River Valley diverted British troops from the Atlantic coast, helping the American effort.
Once France and Spain went to war with Britain, the American Revolution became a world war. The French and British navies fought in the English Channel, Spain attacked British-held Gibraltar in the Mediterranean, and all of them fought battles in the Caribbean. Most important for the American cause, the French fleet supported Washington’s troops throughout the latter part of the war while Spanish funds and smuggling efforts provided badly needed supplies.
THE IROQUOIS AND THE BRITISH
The Iroquois were divided about how to respond to the rebellion, and at the beginning of the war most sought to remain neutral. However, many saw Britain as the key to their independence, and as the war continued, neutrality faded. Beginning in the summer of 1777, Mohawks under the leadership of Thayendanegea, also known as Joseph Brant, attacked white communities 5.1
§2
53
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 143
Sarah Franklin Bache, unlike her half-brother William, was a staunch defender of the patriot cause. She led an effort to raise funds for the troops in the Continental Army and later led an effort in which Philadelphia women made 2,200 shirts for the soldiers.
across New York and Pennsylvania. The attacks on farms threatened a crucial colonial food supply. In response, in the summer of 1779 Washington sent perhaps a third of his army to attack the Iroquois and “lay waste all the settlements around...that the country may not be merely overrun but destroyed.” From Washingtons perspective, the Iroquois had to be stopped. For the Iroquois, Washington’s fierce response was proof that the American leadership would always be an implacable enemy. Both sides adopted brutal scorched-earth tactics that left long-lasting hatreds.
BRITISH LOYALISTS
Colonists who remained loyal to Britain formed their own militia, and in the Carolinas, an army of over a thousand Loyalists challenged rebel forces. Other Loyalists joined British regiments. American rebels had nothing but contempt for them. In the New York-New Jersey area, Catherine and Phillip Van Cortland, one of the area’s leading families, remained loyal to Britain. When Washington gained control of their part of New Jersey, he ordered that the Van Cortland house be used as an army hospital. With her husband away, Catherine and her children were told to leave. She described their February 1777 departure: Our youngest children could not pass a far yard where they were milking cows without wishing for some. My little Willing was almost in agonies, springing in my Arms and calling for milk. I therefore rode up and requested the good man to let me have some from one of his pails.... the man stopped, asked who we were, and.. .swore bitterly he would not give a drop to any Tory Bitch. I offered him money, my children screamed; and, as I could not prevail, I drove on.
In some cities including Newark, New Jersey, in 1777 and Philadelphia in 1780, the wives of missing Loyalists were exiled by the American forces. Some Loyalist families were able to blend back into their old homes after the war, but many left for Canada or England and never returned.
WOMEN’S SUPPORT FOR WASHINGTON’S ARMY
In 1780, at a par ticularly bad time for the Continental troops, Esther De Berdt Reed (wife of the governor of Pennsylvania) and Sarah Franklin Bache (Benjamin Franklin’s daughter) asked patriot women to give up all luxuries and contribute to a fund for the Continental Army. Eventually, the women raised $300,000, a huge sum at the time. The women’s goal was to give $2 in hard currency to every soldier. Washington refused the offer and asked the women instead to buy cloth and sew shirts for the soldiers. The women agreed and produced thousands of shirts for the ill-clad troops. The experience also led to the creation of the Ladies Association, the first intercolonial organization of women in America and a model for future national organizations of women.
Women throughout the colonies found additional ways to support the cause. In Fishing Creek, South Carolina, young girls went from farm to farm, asking, “Is the owner out with the fighting men?” If the answer was yes, then they harvested the land. In five or six weeks, they had completed the harvest for the whole county, saving patriot farmers from economic ruin and providing food stores for the revolutionary cause. Stories of similar efforts abounded.
THE WAR IN THE SOUTH—FROM CHARLESTON TO YORKTOWN
After capturing Savannah, Georgia, in December 1778, the British attacked Charleston, South Carolina, in 1780, and on May 12, 1780, that city surrendered. The loss was significant. If the British took control of Georgia and the Carolinas, it would be hard to continue the resistance in the name of the united colonies and the strategy seemed to be working. 144 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
As the battle for control of the south continued, Washington named one of his generals, Nathaniel Greene, to lead a southern campaign. Greene divided the American forces, taking command of half and assigning others—a contingent of Maryland and Virginia militias—to Daniel Morgan, an experienced officer from Virginia. The British commander, Lord Cornwallis also divided his army between himself and Lieutenant Colonel Banastre Tarleton, who had a reputation for exceptional cruelty.
While the two armies maneuvered, smaller independent units fought their own battles. Not every resident of South Carolina supported independence, and local Loyalists fought against colonial units. Throughout 1780 and 1781, the South Carolina backcountry was filled with ugly and often personal conflicts. Unlike other colonies, the civilian death toll was high in South Carolina as a result.
Morgan made a stand against the British forces in a South Carolina pasture known as Cowpens in January 1781. In one of the last full-scale battles of the war, the American troops defeated Tarleton’s army and captured some 800 British soldiers—a crucial American victory. Although the British still held Charleston and small units loyal to the British harassed the revolutionaries, after Cowpens, the Americans were in control of the South Carolina countryside.
Cornwallis saw little chance of further success in the Carolinas and marched into Virginia in May 1781. He decided to fortify Yorktown on the York River where he thought he could count on being resupplied by water. As Cornwallis’s troops dug in at Yorktown, Washington was in the north planning another attack on New York City. Greene’s army was far to the south. At the prodding of the French, Washington moved quickly to take advantage of the situation. In September, the French navy blockaded the York River and cut Cornwallis off from resupply. Then, supported by French troops under the Count de Rochambeau, Washington marched his own army from New York 450 miles south at surprising speed. On September 28, Washington’s 16,000 troops attacked Yorktown. The siege continued for the next 2 weeks, but after failing at an attempted escape, Cornwallis surrendered on October 17,1781.
5.1
5J
5.3
Pleading illness Cornwallis actually failed to show up for the surrender ceremony, which was handled by
junior British officers. But everyone knew how significant the event was. Without the army that Cornwallis
led, British efforts to defeat the Continental Army were at a standstill.
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 145
Explore the American Revolution on MyHistoryLab
HOW DID THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION UNFOLD?
Between 1775, when fighting broke out near Boston, and the 1783 Treaty of Paris, the British and rebellious American colonists fought the Revolutionary War. This war, however, was in reality a civil war, as some colonists remained loyal to the British Empire while their neighbors rebelled against imperial power. Even though George Washington's Continental Army was outmatched in military manpower and lost more major battles than it won, the superior decision making of its leaders combined with patriotic support throughout the colonies led to a victory for the Americans, and the Thirteen Colonies emerged as the independent United States of America.
The idealized prominence of General George Washington as a war leader is shown as he meets with other generals and officers of the American colonies in a large state room.
HIGHEST LEVEL OF TROOP STRENGTH
50,000
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
American Loyalist in British Army British (1778)	(1781)	(1782)
Source: Longman American History Atlas, 1998
KEY QUESTIONS
Use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions: f
Comparison ►►► Where did the Americans have military successes?
Map the losses and victories of the two sides in the Revolutionary War.
Analysis ►►► Which regions were Loyalist and Patriot strongholds?
Consider the roles of these two groups in the unfolding of the war.
Response ►►► What position did the major cities play in the conflict?
Understand the importance of urban areas for the two sides.
146 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
THE TREATY OF PARIS
The surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown did not end the war, but it virtually guaranteed that it would eventually end favorably for the Americans. British troops still controlled New York City, Charleston, Savannah, and parts of the countryside, but many in Parliament were tired of the war, and public opinion in Britain had turned against continued hostilities. In June, 1780, Congress had sent John Jay to join Benjamin Franklin and John Adams in Paris to negotiate peace. After news of the Yorktown surrender arrived, the British delegates agreed to a draft treaty that began, “His Britannic Majesty acknowledges the said United States ... to be free Sovereign and independent States.” The two sides continued to negotiate boundaries, fishing rights, and legal claims, and Britain concluded separate treaties with France and Spain. The final treaty was signed in Paris on September 3, 1783. The Revolutionary War was over, and a new nation had been born. Quick Review Did the French and Indian War lead directly to the coming of the American Revolution? What other factors might have prevented or caused the outbreak of war in 1775? Make a list of some of the different groups that came to the conclusion that life would be better for them if the colonies were independent from Great Britain. Why did they want independence? Could any independent nation satisfy such diverse goals?
CONCLUSION
Many factors led to the beginning of the American Revolution. As American colonists sought to evade British taxes, John Locke’s ideas about the “Rights of Man” influenced some men—and women—and provided a moral justification for disobeying the crown. Ihe First Great Awakening led many to challenge religious and civil authority.
While ideas fueled the conflicts, the aftermath of the French and Indian War led to some of the most decisive events leading up to the colonies’ break with Britain. While the colonists benefitted from the British takeover of New France, many rebelled against Parliament’s efforts to get colonists to help pay the cost of this war through increased taxation without representation in Britain’s Parliament. Many colonists, too, would not honor George Ill’s Proclamation Line of 1763, which prevented them from appropriating Indian land. Slaves in the American colonies welcomed news that courts in England were moving toward outlawing slavery there; however, plantation owners, who depended on slavery and the slave trade, now had another reason for supporting an open break with the mother country. As resistances to British policies and taxes grew, Parliament responded with new taxes and sent more troops, which only inflamed colonists’ passions and further united them against British rule.
At the first and second Continental Congresses, representatives of the colonies debated the best course of action. In 1775, violence escalated. The combination of unwanted British armed forces in North America as well as unwanted taxes and oppressive laws culminated in armed resistance by the colonists. By mid-1775, Americans had formed their own army under George Washington. The protracted war that followed engulfed the colonies, involving not only white men but also white women, slaves, and the Indians, along with armies and aid from France and Spain. Finally, after years of avoiding capture by the British army and some successful victories by the patriot forces, new alliances with France and Spain helped the colonists’ army, commanded by George Washington, win the surrender of the largest British army in North America. With the surrender of the British forces at Yorktown in 1781, and the Treaty of Paris in 1783, the independence of the United States became a reality.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
Which factors do you think were most important in leading to the colonists' victory against the British Empire?
Chapter 5 The Making of a Revolution 147
Chapter 5 Chapter Review
5.1
PRELUDES TO REVOLUTION____________________________________
Explain Britain's victory over France in the French and Indian War and what conflicts followed this victory.
Review Questions
1.	Crafting an Argument
Is it valid to describe the Seven Years’ War as a “world war”? Why or why not?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the position of the European powers in North America before and after the Seven Years’ War. What were the most important changes?
3.	Historical Interpretation
How did British victory in the Seven Years’ War alter the relationship between Indian peoples and British colonists?
REVOLUTION WAS IN THE MINDS OF THE PEOPLE"
Explain why, in the 15 years before the Revolutionary War began, support for the patriot cause spread so quickly among many different groups of North Americans who opposed Britain for different reasons.
Review Questions
4.	Contextualization
Explain what John Adams meant when he said that the Revolution “was in the minds of the people, and this was effected from 1760 to 1775, in the course of fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at Lexington.”
5.2
53
5.	Historical Interpretation
What were the political consequences of the “revolution in religion” during the mid-1700s?
6.	Historical Interpretation
What might explain the fact that seaport cities were important centers of revolutionary activity?
7.	Crafting an Argument
Why, in some ways, is the term American Revolutions more appropriate than American Revolution?
THE WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE_________________________________
Explain how political and military strategy, support for the patriot cause, and American alliances with France and Spain led to an American victory in the war for independence. Review Questions
8.	Chronological Reasoning
How and why did colonial resentment of British policies move from protest and demonstration to war and the Declaration of Independence between 1774 and 1776?
9.	Contextualization
What do the Articles of Confederation indicate about the political ideals and hopes and fears of the delegates to the Second Continental Congress?
10.	Crafting an Argument
What factors do you think are most important in explaining the American victory in the Revolutionary War?
148 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom-Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Creating a Nation
Having won independence, the new United States faced many crises. In an effort to resolve some of the tensions, some of the nation's leaders proposed a new form of government and met in Philadelphia over the long hot summer of 1787 to produce a new Constitution.
1783-1788
In 1787, a Philadelphia physician, Benjamin Rush, wrote, “The American war is over, but this is far from the case with the American Revolution. On the contrary, nothing but the first act of the great drama is closed.” For the generation that had lived through the 1760s and 1770s, opportunities abounded to help shape the new nation they had created. When Congress adopted the official seal of the new nation (found today on the back of every dollar bill), they included the Latin phrase Novus Ordo Seclorum, “a new order of the ages.” Thomas Paine wrote, “We have it in our power to begin the world over again.” Many in the new United States of America thought they could do just that.
The revolutionary leaders—Washington, Adams, Jefferson—have become cardboard characters. Their words have been invoked too often, their deeds too sanitized. But if today’s citizens are to make sense of the Revolution and the creation of a new nation, they need to see those leaders as real. In addition, people today need to realize that many other actors were also asserting their place in—or, in the case of American Indians and Loyalists, on the margins of—the new nation. Those known as the “founding fathers” were far from the only actors. Women who had lived through the Revolution were far less willing to leave political or domestic decisions to men than their mothers and grandmothers had been. Poor farmers often felt
OBJECTIVES
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the Revolution affected diverse groups of people and how independence ultimately led to the adoption of a new form of government.
THE STATE OF THE NATION AT WAR'S END
Explain how the outcome of the American Revolution affected different groups in the new United States.
CREATING A GOVERNMENT: WRITING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION
Explain the needs, pressures, and compromises that led to writing and adopting the Constitution.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 149
Significant Dates
1783	The Newburgh Conspiracy among Revolutionary War officers
Treaty of Paris recognizes U.S. independence
1784	Treaty of Fort Stanwix between Iroquois and the United States
Post-Revolutionary War economic downturn
1786	Annapolis Convention
1786-	1787 Shays's Rebellion in Massachusetts
1787	Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia Northwest Ordinance
1787-	1788 The Federalist papers published
State conventions adopt the Constitution
that their grievances had not been addressed by independence, and they continued to complain. Even among those who led the Revolution itself, there were great differences of opinion, especially regarding the best ways to govern the new nation and to maintain the liberty for which they had fought. What that new order would look like depended on not only where one stood in 1783 but also where one had stood before and during the Revolution. Exploring the efforts that helped create a stable and strong nation out of 13 British colonies requires, first, understanding what the end of the Revolution meant for different groups of people who found themselves in different circumstances.
THE STATE OF THE NATION AT WAR’S END
64
Explain how the outcome of the American Revolution affected different groups in the new United States.
For people of all classes, races, and political persuasions in British North America, the Revolution brought extensive change. Great inequality remained, but few people were willing to defend it as they had in the colonial era. Despite Abigail Adams’s plea to her husband John that the Continental Congress should “remember the ladies” or Jefferson’s assertions about the evils of slavery in his original drafts of the Declaration of Independence, sexism, slavery, and many forms of inequality survived the Revolution intact. Nevertheless, something had changed. No form of inequality survived the separation from Great Britain untouched. Forces had been unleashed, intended or not, that would undermine oppression. Thomas Paine, ever the optimistic recorder of events, wrote, “We see with other eyes; we hear with other ears, and think with other thoughts, than those we formerly used.” And he explained that freedom, to him, meant “perfect equality.... The floor of Freedom is as level as water.” Not all of his contemporaries wanted “perfect equality,” but passive acceptance of inequality or hierarchy was much less common after the Revolution.
For the Revolutionary Army Officers: The Newburgh Conspiracy
democracy
A form of government in which power is vested in the people and exercised by them directly or indirectly through a system of representation.
The American experiment in creating an independent nation that would be a democracy, governed by the will of the majority—or at least the white male majority—almost died before it was born. During the long months between the victory at Yorktown in late 1781 and the treaty that ended the war in March 1783, the army that had won the war came close to a military takeover of the government—a coup detat and a military dictatorship. Once the army had won its final battle, the Continental Congress asked the soldiers to wait. And the army, especially the officers, did not wait patiently in the year and a half that followed.
By the spring of 1783, the soldiers and officers had many reasons for complaint. The northern army was in barracks in Newburgh, New York. They were bored. By December 1782, they had not been paid for months. Pensions that the Congress had promised looked like they might never be paid. General Alexander McDougall and Colonels John Brooks and Matthias Ogden took a petition from Newburgh to the Congress in Philadelphia that said, “We have borne all that men can bear—our property is expended—our private resources are at an end, and our friends are wearied out and disgusted with our incessant applications.” Borrowing money from friends to survive did not sit well with these officers. They warned that “any further experiments on their [the army’s] patience may have fatal effects.”
The petition arrived in Philadelphia at a crucial moment. The new nation was governed by the Articles of Confederation that had been adopted during the Revolution. Under the Articles, which did ensure a democratic government, led by a Congress of representatives elected by the voters of the 13 states, the national government could not levy taxes or raise funds without the unanimous approval of all the states. In late 1782, some of the states had rejected a proposal to tax imports. Alexander Hamilton wrote, Without certain revenues, a government can have no power.’ Ihe government that received the petition from the officers was in just that situation.
150 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Those in the Congress who supported the idea of a more powerful central government used the army s petition to demand that the Congress be given the power to tax so it could raise its own funds and not have to depend on the generosity of state legislatures. These Federalists, who in the next decade formed the nucleus of the Federalist Party, led by Alexander Hamilton, made it clear to the army’s representatives that they needed to support the move to give the Congress the power to tax if they were ever going to get paid. The other main faction in Congress, however—leaders who later became the Republican-Democrat Party that emerged in the 1790s—feared maintaining a standing army and opposed a larger government fueled by national taxes. They wanted to maintain the national government just as it was—as a weak alliance of individually strong states.
Deadlock followed. It was a dangerous moment. The threat by the army’s officers to use force was real. They had been promised payment. Congress had now linked the payments to other agendas and postponed action. While most of those in the army were angry, there were also significant differences among them. A group of young officers were ready for action. They thought that George Washington was far too moderate. Their hero was Horatio Gates, who had led the victory at Saratoga and who disliked Washington. Some around Gates, perhaps in consultation with some Federalists in Congress, began planning for a military takeover of the new Republic. In March 1783, Major John Armstrong, Jr., published the first of what were called the “Newburgh Addresses,” anonymously belittling the “milk and water style” and “meek language” of the previous petitions to Congress and calling for a meeting of the officers to discuss the situation.
General Washington was horrified. Military action would undermine everything for which he and the officers had fought. But Washington was a crafty politician. He simply asked the officers to postpone their meeting by a few days, invited Gates to preside, and requested a full report, implying that he would not be there. The officers who wanted action thought they had won and that they could meet with Washington’s blessing.
But when Gates called the meeting to order, Washington entered the room and requested permission to speak. Though he was furious, Gates knew he could not refuse Washington in front of the other officers. Washington then attacked the anonymous “Newburgh Addresses” as “unmilitary” and “subversive of all order and discipline.” He reminded the officers, “I have been...the constant companion and witness of your distresses.” Would the army, he asked, contemplate attacking the Congress? “My God!” he said, “What can this writer have in view,” by recommending such measures?
Ihe speech worked. The officers cheered Washington. All threat of military action against the weak civil government was over. Congress voted to give a lump sum payment to all the officers who had been promised a pension and passed a tax on imports to pay off the national debt, including the debt to the army.
The so-called Newburgh Conspiracy was defeated. In November, the last British troops left New York City, and the American officers and their troops marched into the city and began its transition to civilian leadership. Instead of seizing power, the Continental Army began to disband, with payment as promised. Washington made a triumphal entry into the city and, on December 4, 1783, gave an emotional farewell to his officers. He then returned to civilian life at his home in Mount Vernon, Virginia. By January 1784, the army had shrunk to some 600 soldiers, ensuring a transition to civilian rule.
For Poor White Farmers: Shays's Rebellion
Like the officers of the Continental Army, the poor of colonial society—now the poor of the new nation—were also unhappy, in some cases violently unhappy. Some had served as enlisted soldiers in the Revolutionary army and had their own complaints about salaries. Beginning in 1784, the influx of imported goods that came with the war’s end created an economic depression that hit hardest those who were already
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 151
Having led the American army through the hard years of the Revolutionary War and ensured a transition to civilian government, George Washington said farewell to many of the officers who had served with him. He retired to Mount Vernon in December 1783.
Shays's Rebellion
An armed movement of debt-ridden farmers in western Massachusetts in the winter of 1786-1787 who objected to the state's effort to tax them to pay off the Revolutionary War debt.
poor. The most famous response to this unhappiness in the first years of the new Republic took place in Massachusetts and came to be known as Shays’s Rebellion, named for one of its leaders, Daniel Shays. Those who participated in the rebellion called themselves Regulators—not to be confused with those in the Carolinas who had taken the law into their own hands before the Revolution, but simply people who wanted to regulate the power of the new state governments.
In 1786, farmers in western Massachusetts began petitioning the state legislature for relief from economic hardships brought on by a significant increase in their taxes as the legislature tried to pay off Revolutionary War debts and by the postwar economic depression that reduced the value of farm products. For farmers who were used to being self-sufficient, the reduction in their income and demands for taxes to be paid in cash were too much to accept. They were being threatened with foreclosure and their way of life was being destroyed because they could not raise the money demanded of them. They had to do something.
When faced with the petitions of the farmers, the Massachusetts legislature, dominated by commercial leaders from the eastern part of the state, blamed the farmers for their own plight. In response, the farmers decided on direct action. They simply stopped the courts from issuing foreclosure rulings. On August 29,1786,1,500 farmers armed with clubs and muskets shut down the court in Northampton as it attempted to hear cases. They also stopped courts in four other towns.
The governor and legislature reacted by passing a Riot Act that prohibited 12 or more armed persons from gathering and authorized county sheriffs to kill those who disobeyed the law. They also suspended the writ of habeas corpus and authorized the governor to arrest and hold without bail “any person or persons whatsoever.”
152
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Shays's Rebellion, an uprising of poor farmers who were in danger of losing their land because of increased taxes, symbolized the discontent that many Americans felt during the economic downturn after the Revolution, but it also struck fear into many other Americans who believed the nation was on the edge of anarchy and needed a much stronger central government to deal with matters.
But the farmers, many of whom had fought as soldiers in the Revolution, were prepared to fight a second time for their rights as free citizens. From their perspective, the Massachusetts legislature was acting like the former royal governor. Shays and several thousand of his fellow citizens now took up arms, fearing for “our lives and families which will be taken from us if we don’t defend them.”
By January 1787, the Regulators had decided to overthrow the government of Massachusetts. Shays himself planned to attack the federal arsenal in Springfield and then march to Boston to “destroy the nest of devils, who by their influence, make the Court enact what they please, burn it and lay the town of Boston in ashes.” He came close to succeeding.
By late January, thousands of well-armed farmers surrounded the federal arsenal in Springfield, which was defended by 1,000 state militia under the command of Major General William Shepard. Unfortunately for the rebellion, different groups thought the assault was set for different days, and so on January 25, as a smaller group than expected marched on the arsenal, Shepards troops fired over their heads but then directly into their ranks. Four or five were killed, and the rest retreated. They did not immediately give up their idea of overthrowing the state government, but no other attack came as close to doing so.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 153
6.1
6.2
—
As 1787 wore on, the rebellion slowly ended. The Regulators had few friends in the government of Massachusetts or the surrounding states and were not able to establish a political base. In 1788, the economy began to recover, which made life more tolerable for farmers. Some of the rebels left Massachusetts for more remote places. Shays himself settled in Vermont. But the rebels had terrified the nation s elite and hastened the movement toward a stronger national government.
Fears of the rebellion in Massachusetts inspired other revolutionary leaders to act. When he first heard news of Shays’s Rebellion, Washington told Henry Lee of Virginia that the rebellion was “proof of what our trans-Atlantic foe has predicted. ..that mankind when left to themselves are unfit for their own Government.” But, despite their worries, men like Washington and Lee were determined not to let such a proof stand. The convention that met in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787 was a direct result.
For White Settlers Moving West
i V) TJ	' NORTHWEST St. Louis* TERRrr0RY	vIRG.N»;i;'
KENTUCKY
Ki~. z l/t	-~<X
Fort"
/ San Fernando
NORTH CAROLINA-
SOUTH
CAROLINA
o
c-


Fort Nogales i Natchez /
(GEORGIA r
SJ**t
New
Orleans
Pensacola

:st.
Augustine
V
Gulf of Mexico
The new nation was huge compared to the territorial size of the European powers. The Treaty of Paris recognized the eastern border of the United States as running along the Atlantic coast from Maine to Georgia. Since Britain had returned Florida to Spain at the end of the Revolutionary War, the new nation was cut off from the Gulf of Mexico, and Spain was not always a friendly southern neighbor. The Treaty of Paris also made the eastern shore of the Mississippi River the nations western boundary. The British proclamation line that had protected Indian tribes in the Ohio region and caused so much tension was not mentioned in the treaty. Control of the Mississippi River itself— the right to travel on it—would remain contested, especially since the river ended at the city of New Orleans, which Spain zealously guarded (see Map 6-1).
Within this vast territory, the 13 states hugged the Atlantic coast. American Indians dominated the interior, but without even the modest protection from white settlers that Britain had provided. More whites were crossing the mountains and claiming western lands despite the lack of government approval and the dangers of Indian attack. Royal charters gave many of the states’ claims to lands far into the interior. But soon after the Revolution ended, the Continental Congress began resolving conflicting land claims and creating new states and territories west of the original 13 states.
One of the first issues to be resolved was over the conflicting claims of New York and New Hampshire to the land on the eastern side of Lake Champlain. Many of the whites who had settled the region wanted independence from both. Local heroes, such as Ethan Allen and his Green Mountain Boys, had fought for the American cause in the region and wanted to control their home. As a result, Vermont became the first new state in 1791 (see Map 6-2).
One of the most significant accomplishments of the Congress that operated under the Articles of Confederation was the creation of the Northwest Territory out of lands claimed by Pennsylvania, New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts. Between 1784 and 1787, Congress set up territorial governments for what would become Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin. It took years of difficult negotiations before the original states gave up their conflicting claims to the interior lands, but ordinances passed between 1784 and 1787 created a new structure for the future Midwest. In 1785, Congress ordered that the lands be surveyed, set off into a grid pattern with most sections to be sold, while some were reserved for future government needs and specifically for the support of schools. The grid system established in 1785 was used in future territories, creating clear and well-organized boundaries for farms and towns, but encouraging widely dispersed settlements
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
-----Boundary claimed by
Spain after 1783
•----Boundary set by
Pinckney's Treaty, 1795
|	| Area disputed by U.S.
and Spain ■ Spanish fort • Spanish settlement
MAP 6-1 The American-Spanish Border, 1783-1795. In the Treaty of Paris, Great Britain not only recognized American independence but returned control of Florida to Spain, creating the southern border for the United States; though, as the map shows, the border was far from clear.
West of the United States was the vast Louisiana Territory, for the time being also under Spanish control.
154 Partlll
A
New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800 6.1
MAP 6-2 State Claims to Western Lands. The huge tract of land that the King's Proclamation Line had reserved for Indian tribes before the Revolution became part of the United States in 1783. Different original states claimed this land and one of the first duties of Congress was to sort out those conflicting claims. After 1783 no one in government spoke for the rights of the Native Americans whose land much of the territory had been.
RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT
1 | 6.2		
L ...	i.H-1	Uij
1..J Northwest Territory. Virginia claimed this entire
region and ceded it to the national government in 1784. Other states ceded their conflicting claims as indicated.
Southwest Territory (other state cessions) Disputed claim between U.S. and Spain
“ " Claimed by New York (ceded 1782)
— Boundaries for claims by other eastern states
rather than compact communities (see Map 6-3). The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 banned slavery in these territories as well as mandating religious freedom and the development of public schools. The act also declared that “the utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the Indians; their lands and property shall never be taken from them without their consent,” though little was done to enforce this provision.
Further south, white settlement was, if anything, proceeding faster. An accomplished soldier, hunter, and trapper, Daniel Boone first explored the trans-Appalachian territory that would be known as Kentucky in 1767 when it was still off limits to whites. As the Revolution was starting in 1775 and the British ability to stop settlement was ebbing, Boone blazed the “Wilderness Trail” through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachians and established a settlement he called Boonesborough. During and after the war, many more settlers followed the Wilderness Trail. Virginia gave up its long-standing claims to the region, and the federal government, recognizing that there were already slaves in the territory, admitted Kentucky to the union as a slave state in 1792 and Tennessee in 1796.
The Northwest Ordinance of 1787
Legislation passed by Congress under the Articles of Confederation that provided for public schools, the sale of government land, and prohibited slavery in the Northwest Territories.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 155
6.1
5.2
-6 miles-
6	5	4	3	2	1
7	8	9	10	11	12
18	17	■	’T	14	13
19	20	21	22	23	24
30	29	28	27	26	
31	32	33	34	35	
THE SURVEY SYSTEM
A township (36 square miles)
Income from section 16 reserved for school support
HOne section (1 sq. mi.)
Quarter-quarter-sections (40 acres)
Half-quarter-sections
Pa,-;
1	| Northwest Territory
R~^|
Disputed boundary ■ British fort  ,


Superior
NORTH
(CANADA)
0837)"
Fort Detroit
oSgrVz I /z-4

' ■
; /.all

Pojflf-au-Fer’
P
Ont«ri0 " Z t>C - NEYJf" 1 Fort Niagara YORK 

MAINE) (Mass.)iy
’ Dutclyrtan's'Poirtt^// '
NEW /
) HAMPSHIRE
Z {	>
) MASSACHUSETTS (5
Vt	RHODE
P/ A ISLAND
4^ CONNECTICUT
S S ' INDIANA B
,j(W3) fW jNots. f{i8W7 ) \ Mr 1 ABM 7
?\f	KElUtKY -
> P ■ C	,..,,0-792) *) x>
I
BlSK, 'V' Z- z , "M <9
t f iv"",-T€lW^SEE(17^6)Z
‘PENNSYLVANIA
7	: -	J
NO^fW CAROLINA '
DELAWARE
IYLAND
ATLANTIC OCEAN
MAP 6-3 The Northwest Territory Grid System. The Northwest Ordinance divided the territory into what would become five states. It also created a survey system in which the land would be divided into townships made up of 36 "sections," 35 of which would be available to settlers and one of which would be reserved to support schools.
Even further south, the land west of Georgia that would eventually become the northern two-thirds of Alabama and Mississippi was organized as the Mississippi Territory in 1798, but the territorial government there was ineffective, and Georgia did not give up its own claims until 1802. (The southern third of Alabama and Mississippi was known as West Florida, part of the Spanish-controlled territory on the country’s southern border.) While the Congress tried to settle conflicting claims to the western lands, the Indians, who had the oldest claim to the land, had no inclination to give it up.
For American Indians
For the federal Congress, the greatest threat to the new United States came from American Indians. For most of the tribes who lived between the Atlantic coast and the Mississippi River, the end of the American Revolution was one more disaster among many. Despite the loyalty of the Iroquois to the British during the Revolution, the kings government agreed to the Treaty of Paris in 1783, which ceded all the lands between the Atlantic coast and the Mississippi and south of the Great Lakes and Canada to the new United States, without consulting with their old allies. The Proclamation Line limiting white settlement was gone. Among the many Indian tribes, even among the Iroquois, there were differing responses to the British failure to honor their loyalty. Many Indian leaders saw no reason to honor a treaty in which they had played no part and continued to act as if much of New York and Pennsylvania and all lands west of the Ohio River belonged to them.
Under the leadership of Joseph Brant, the Mohawks, who had fought so hard for the British between 1776 and 1781, petitioned the British authorities in Quebec for land on the British side of the new border and were granted a large tract in Canada. But they, like other tribes, did not let an international boundary limit their range of hunting or living. New York and Pennsylvania petitioned the Congress for help with the Indian tribes on their western frontiers, and the New York legislature considered expelling all the tribes of the Six Nations because of their alliance with the British during the war (see Map 6-4).
156 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
6.1
MAP 6-4 Ohio in the 1780s. The land that would later become the state of Ohio was a battlefield in the 1780s. While Great Britain included the land as part of the newly independent United States in 1783, in reality Native American tribes were the dominant force in the region and they often received aid from their Canadian-based British allies.
Through the Treaty of Paris, the British also promised to withdraw from all forts south of the Great Lakes. As a result, a power vacuum was looming in the region, though the British were slow to honor their commitment to leave their western forts. Rather than depend on state militia, Congress in 1783 began to create the U.S. Army to occupy Fort Niagara near today’s Buffalo, New York, and Fort Pitt, today’s Pittsburgh. Although Congress could create an army, its difficulty in raising funds meant that the Secretary of War, former General Henry Knox, had to beg for money to keep the army paid, fed, and supplied, which strengthened the hand of Indian leaders committed to resisting white expansion. And many meant to resist.
The Iroquois were far from the only Indians who began to resist American expansion violently. These tribes had never formally agreed to peace with the new nation, and they attacked both the army and the settlers. The small battles—individual attacks, kidnappings, and destruction of property—continued as they had during the Revolution. The U.S. Army was far too small, ill-trained, and ill-supplied to be much of a deterrent. Given how weak the army was, the Indians held the upper hand in the Northwest Territory and Kentucky.
A temporary peace along the New York border was secured in October 1784 by the Treaty of Fort Stanwix between some of the Iroquois and the U.S. government. But many, including Sagoyewatha (Red Jacket) of the Seneca and Joseph Brant opposed the treaty, and it did not hold. In fact, the Indians of the Northwest Territory would remain virtually at war with the United States from 1785 until 1795.
Treaty of Fort Stanwix
A 1784 treaty between one faction of the Iroquois and the U.S. government that sought to end the violent battles over land in New York, Pennsylvania, and the Ohio River Valley to the west.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 157
Joseph Brant, or Thayendanegea, was a leader among the Mohawks, who convinced many in the Iroquois federation to support the British cause during the Revolution and oppose American expansion after the war, as he negotiated for Native American rights. He was one of the very few people of any race to meet with both George Washington and King George III.
After the Treaty of Fort Stanwix was signed, Brant sailed for London where he met with many high-ranking British officials and had an audience with King George III. He sought financial support for his people as compensation for their role on the British side in the Revolution, and he—and his British hosts—also seem to have devel-oped a plan for Indian resistance to the new American nation.
In 1785 and 1786, Brant began to create an Indian confederation that could successfully resist the United States. The confederation included not only representatives of the Iroquois but also many other tribes who had been traditional enemies of the Iroquois as well as Cherokees from much further south and smaller tribes who resided in the Ohio River Valley. It would be one of the most unified and effective adversaries that the United States would face. The Indians demanded that the Congress ensure that white settlement ended at the Ohio River.
While the Indians and Congress negotiated fitfully, the frontier remained a violent place. In the late 1780s, 1,500 white settlers and at least as many Indians in Ohio and Kentucky were killed (see Map 6-5). The United States had no intention of ceding as much land to the Indians as they demanded, but under the Articles of Confederation, it was difficult to organize an army to enforce the government’s claims. The need to create a government strong enough to counter the Indians led many to support the Constitution in 1787.
For Slaves, Former Slaves, and Those Who Claimed Ownership of Them
In 1791, Benjamin Banneker, a free African-American whose parents had been slaves, wrote to Thomas Jefferson, then Washingtons secretary of state, reminding him that in 1776 Jefferson had written, “that all men are created equal, and that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights.” Banneker continued:
[B]ut sir, how pitiable is it to reflect that although you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of the Father of mankind...you should... counteract his mercies, in detaining by fraud and violence so numerous a part of my brethren, under groaning captivity and cruel oppression, that you should...be found guilty of that most criminal act, which you professedly detested in others, with respect to yourselves.
Banneker would not let Jefferson forget the contradiction at the heart of the new American enterprise and Jefferson’s own life.
As Banneker’s letter indicates, many slaves and former slaves understood that the words freedom and liberty also ought to count for them. By the end of the Revolution, many whites agreed. Back in 1775, Thomas Paine asked how Americans could complain about British tyranny “while they hold so many hundreds of thousands in slavery?”
The issue of freedom and liberty seemed to be gaining ground for some slaves after 1776. News traveled slowly, but word spread that in 1794, in the midst of the French Revolution, the French National Convention had abolished slavery, and then that slaves in France s most lucrative Caribbean colony had won independence for what became the black-led Republic of Haiti.
When Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown in 1781, he had between 4,000 and 5,000 former slaves with his army. Many more were in other British-held areas, especially New York City. As the war ended, the British returned some slaves to old masters, gave others to new masters in the Caribbean, or simply abandoned them. But many former slaves also sailed with the British when they left the colonies, some settling as free people in Canada, England, or West Africa. A former slave named Boston King wrote that, “The English had compassion upon us in the day of distress. Soon after, ships were fitted out, and furnished with every necessary for conveying us to Nova Scotia. Life was not easy for African-Americans in Nova Scotia, but they were free.
By the time George Washington was inaugurated president in 1789, slavery had been abolished in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont and was dying—
though slowly—throughout the north. Northern slaves worked as household help and J 58 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
I I
Major Southeastern Indian groups f i Attempted state of Franklin —— Spanish boundary claim —— U.S. boundary set in 1783 treaty with England Spanish Louisiana, eastern boundary •— Spanish East Florida, northern boundary
—	Spanish West Florida
-	- Natchez Trace
6.1
6.2

MAP 6-5 Tribal Land Claims 1783-1788. Especially in the southwest of the new United States, strong Native American tribes clamed large areas and did not much care whether the U.S. or Spain claimed the territory since they did not want settlers from either country.
labored in factories and farms. New York had the most slaves in the north, concentrated in Manhattan but also working on the great estates of the Hudson Valley. New Jersey and Rhode Island were next in number. In the north, however, more money was made on the slave trade than on slave labor. The Northwest Ordinance prohibited slavery in the Ohio region. Many thought slavery would also die out in Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia. Only in the Carolinas, Georgia, and the new western areas of Kentucky and Tennessee was slavery still strong.
Despite the regional differences, by 1789, 1 in 10 African-Americans was a free person. Some had won their freedom through the army. Some had won through state action. Some had been set free by individual slave owners. But in 1789, one could not assume that to be black was to be a slave. That truth was a significant change from 1776 when free blacks were a definite exception in every one of the 13 colonies.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 159
r
6.1
6.2
After Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont abolished slavery, other northern states with more slaves moved exceedingly slowly toward gradual emancipation (Table 6-1). The Pennsylvania law of 1780 declared slavery “disgraceful to any people,” but then set up a system in which the first slaves would not be freed until 1808 and the last would not be emancipated until 1847. New York’s abolition law of 1799 and New Jersey’s of 1804, as well as similar laws in Connecticut and Rhode Island, were equally slow in their operations. Although every northern state had started the process of ending slavery before 1800, it was almost 1850 before slavery disappeared in the north.
Free blacks sometimes found work in the same households where they had been slaves. Black men worked on merchant ships, whaling vessels, or even in the navy. (The racially diverse crew of the whaling ship Pequod in Herman Melville’s 1851 novel Moby Dick was not unusual.) In Philadelphia, New York, Providence, and Boston, many blacks worked on the docks. Throughout the northern states more and more free blacks referred to themselves as Africans or, as the Free African Society of Philadelphia said, “free Africans and their descendants.”
In the region encompassing Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, slavery did not die out, but slave life changed after the Revolution. Some masters heeded the revolutionary language of freedom. James Madison freed one slave named Billy because he came to fear that Billy’s love of freedom meant he was no longer “a fit companion for fellow slaves.” George Washington wrote often of his wish that slavery could be gradually abolished and left instructions in his will that all his slaves should be free after he and Martha died. Other planters in the region also freed slaves. Slaves who had run away during the war managed to establish new identities and maintain their freedom, especially in cities like Baltimore, Richmond, and the new District of Columbia. By 1810, almost a quarter of the African-Americans in Maryland, a third in the District of Columbia, and six or seven percent in Virginia and North Carolina were free. A thriving community of free people of African descent emerged. As a sign of their growing confidence, in 1792, Thomas Brown, a black Revolutionary War veteran in Baltimore, ran, although unsuccessfully, for the Maryland legislature, promising to “represent so many hundreds of poor Blacks.”
TABLE 6-1 The Free Black Population in the Early United States
State	Free black population in 1790	Total black population in 1790	Percentage of free blacks in total black population	Free black population in 1810	Total black population in 1810	Percentage of free blacks in total black population
New Hampshire	630	788	80%	970	970	100%
Vermont	255	271	94%	750	750	100%
Massachusetts	6,001	6,001	100%	7,706	7,706	100%
Connecticut	2,808	5,572	50%	6,453	6,763	95%
Rhode Island	3,407	4,355	78%	3,609	3,717	97%
New York	4,654	25,978	18%	25,333	40,350	63%
New Jersey	2,762	14,185	19%	7,843	18,694	42%
Pennsylvania	6,537	10,324	63%	22,492	23,287	97%
Delaware	3,899	12,786	30%	13,136	17,313	76%
Maryland	8,043	111,079	7%	33,927	145,429	23%
Virginia	12,866	305,493	4%	30,570	423,088	7%
North Carolina	4,975	105,547	5%	10,266	179,090	6%
Kentucky	114	12,544	1%	1,713	82,274	2%
Tennessee	361	3,778	10%	1,317	45,845	3%
District of Columbia	—	—	—	2,549	7,944	32%
South Carolina	1,801	108,895	2%	4,544	200,919	2%
Georgia	398	29,662	1%	1,801	107,019	2%
Partlll

American Voices
Prince Hall, “From Slavery to Equality,” 1797
Born a slave, Prince Hall was freed before the Revolution, and after the war he played a leading role in abolishing slavery in Massachusetts. Hall helped create the African Lodge of the Masons in Boston and delivered the following speech to that group. He makes it clear that although African-Americans in his city are free, they are far from equal; still, he urges his audience to take heart at the promise of freedom seen in the revolution in Haiti.
Now, my brethren, nothing is stable; all things are changeable. Let us seek those things which are sure and steadfast, and let us pray God that, while we remain here, he would give us the grace of patience and strength to bear up under all our troubles, which, at this day, God knows, we have our share of. Patience, I say; for were we not possessed of a great measure of it, we could not bear up under the daily insults we meet with in the streets of Boston, much more on public days of recreation. How, at such times, are we shamefully abused, and that to such a degree that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands, and the arrows of death are flying about our heads. Helpless women have their clothes torn from their backs....I was told by a gentleman who saw this filthy behavior in the Common that, in all places he had been in, he never saw so cruel behavior in all his life; and that a slave in the West Indies on Sundays or holidays enjoys himself and friends without molestation....
My brethren, let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we at present are laboring under, for the
darkest hour is just before the break of day. My brethren, let us remember what a dark day it was with our African brethren, six years ago, in the French West Indies. Nothing but the snap of the whip was heard, from morning to evening. Hanging, breaking on the wheel, burning and all manner of tortures were inflicted upon those unhappy people. But, blessed be God, the scene is changed. They now confess that God hath no respect of person and, therefore, receive them as their friends and treat them as brothers. Thus doth Ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery, to freedom and equality.
Source: Prince Hall,"Thus Doth Ethiopia Stretch Forth Her Hand from Slavery, to Freedom and Equality," (1797) in Manning Marable and Leith Mullings, editors, Let Nobody Turn Us Around: Voices of Resistance, Reform, and Renewal (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000), pp. 16-18.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What light does Hall's speech shed on race relations in Boston in the late 1700s?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What connection did Hall make between the revolts that would produce an independent Haiti and the situation confronting African-Americans? How might his analysis of events in the French West Indies have differed from that of many white observers?
In this region, slaves and free blacks worked in an economy that was more diverse than before the war. By 1790, slaves in Virginia and Maryland, for example, were increasingly engaged in growing wheat, a crop that required horses that needed tending, plows, and fertilizer. They also worked in flour mills and the ironworks, blacksmith shops, and other enterprises that were springing up in the region. Some slaves were “rented out” and moved from job to job, giving them a chance to learn more skills, travel short distances, make a little money, and gain a taste of freedom.
Other slaves from the region were far less fortunate. In the years after the Revolution, with the plantations of Virginia and Maryland stabilized in size, slave owners needed fewer slaves. So they increased their wealth by developing a new internal market in humans. They encouraged slaves to have more children and then, as those children reached adolescence, sold them, as they sold other agricultural products, for transport to places that needed more and more slave labor. Slaves were taken to join the white settlers who established the new states of Kentucky and Tennessee. Other slaves were transported to South Carolina and Georgia.
Further south, in South Carolina and Georgia, life for slaves was very different. Some of the fiercest fighting of the Revolution had disrupted almost every aspect of life in South Carolina and Georgia, and slaves had more opportunities to run away. With the coming of peace, however, the planter elite in these states was determined to reestablish a way of life that depended on slavery. Slaves represented between 40 and
A
New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800 Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 161
60 percent of the population in South Carolina and Georgia. Slave labor had produced great fortunes for the plantation owners before the war, and it would produce new fortunes for them after the war ended.
Whereas many planters in Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina felt the need to consider the rhetoric of freedom and perhaps modify the tyranny of slavery, planters in South Carolina and Georgia made it clear that they believed such language did not apply to slaves. As a result, the few free blacks in the southernmost states, often people who had black, white, and Indian heritage, were kept as far away from the slave community as possible so the slaves would not hear the contagious language of freedom.
In the 20 years after 1790, the number of slaves doubled in South Carolina from 100,000 to 200,000, and in Georgia it more than tripled from 30,000 to over 100,000. The rapid growth of the slave population in South Carolina and Georgia at the end of the 1700s also led to a new kind of community life in the slave quarters of these large plantations. Unlike those who owned a lone slave or a single slave family, which could be closely supervised, the largest plantations in South Carolina and Georgia had hundreds of slaves in the 1790s. Slave labor created great wealth, and the owners of these plantations were the economic elite of their states, but they were often away, preferring the social life of Charleston or Savannah. Slaves, though driven by overseers, were able to develop their own community lives and norms within the slave quarters, which had not been possible on the smaller farms and plantations of an earlier era. Having their own vegetable gardens sometimes gave slaves limited economic freedom. Religious gatherings provided communal support.
For Women: The Rise of Republican Motherhood
In April 1776, Abigail Adams wrote to her husband John while the future president was attending the Congress that would issue the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia and she was managing the family and farm in Quincy, Massachusetts, from which he was so often absent. She told him to “remember the ladies.” And she warned, “Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of husbands.... If particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.” Abigail was quite serious in her demand. Her husband, however, treated his wife’s plea as a kind of joke. John Adams wrote back to his wife saying, “Our struggle has loosened the bonds of government everywhere; that children and apprentices were disobedient,” but, he said, Abigail’s letter “was the first intimation that another tribe, more numerous and powerful than all the rest, were grown discontented.” We do not know how she responded to having her husband lump her plea for a voice in government with the discontent of children and apprentices. Abigail and John had a close marriage, but while she was serious about wanting the American Revolution to recognize more rights for women, he was equally determined to ignore her plea.
Women, of course, fell into all of the different groups that men did. American Indian women, most of whom like the men had supported the British, often paid a high price for their loyalty to Britain. Mary (Molly) Brant, the sister of Joseph Brant, convinced many Iroquois to support an Iroquois-British alliance during the war. When the war ended, she found a new home in Canada, reminding the British authorities that they were not providing the support they had promised her people.
Slave women also sided with the British more often than with the American Revolutionaries. With British armies operating in the southern colonies, and the British welcoming slaves to their side, women as well as men fled to freedom with the British. Of the 23 slaves who ran away from Thomas Jefferson’s plantations during the Revolution, 13 were female. More than 40 percent of all of the former slaves who left with the British at the end of the war were women.
162 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Some white women rich and poor—also supported the British cause and paid dearly for it. With the coming of the war, many Loyalist wives stayed behind to mind their homes when their husbands joined the British army or fled to Canada. These women faced hostile neighbors and local governments, and many lost their homes.
For white women who supported the Revolution, life was also hard, but the outcome was usually better. The Revolutionary War shaped the lives of most women who had supported it. For some, it changed virtually every aspect of life. After the war, Deborah Sampson, who had pretended to be a man and fought in the war, married and lived in Sharon, Massachusetts, but she was also entertained by President Washington, was granted a revolutionary soldier’s pension by Congress, and became something of a national hero. Other women did not easily return to their old ways, limited to the private sphere of their families. With many men away for months or years, women took on household duties that were, by long tradition, men’s exclusive sphere. Mary Bartlett, whose husband represented New Hampshire in Congress, reflected a changed attitude experienced by many. In her first letters in 1776, she wrote about “Your farming business,” but by 1778, it had become “our farming business.” The difference of one word that made it clear she now included herself in the ownership of their farm was an important change.
Many women who had coped with years of isolation during the war found that the political independence of the United States brought personal independence, too. More women postponed marriage, demanded divorces from unhappy marriages, and sought higher education as well as new—if limited—political involvement in the new republic.
For many Americans, women and men, the book, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, written in 1792 by British writer Mary Wollstonecraft, gave words to ideas that had been taking shape since the Revolution. In her appeal for equality, Wollstonecraft called for equal education, and coeducation, for girls and boys. In America, Judith Sargent Murray expanded Wollstonecraft’s arguments and insisted that women are indeed “in every respect equal to men.”
Important as they were, the ideas about total equality developed by Wollstonecraft and Murray did not become the dominant ideology of the new nation. Instead, something much more moderate, known as Republican Motherhood, came to dominate public discussions of women’s place in the new United States. As the ideology of Republican Motherhood was developed in pulpits and magazines after the Revolution, women would have an important role, but a limited one—not full citizenship but also no return to a merely passive role in the domestic sphere that had been prescribed before 1776. Republican Motherhood was a kind of middle position. Its advocates suggested that women would advise their husbands and raise their sons to be active citizens and their daughters to be part of another generation of republican mothers who shaped the nation from home. But to play this role, its advocates insisted that women also needed an education, perhaps a different education from men, but a better one than that given to their mothers and grandmothers.
In 1778, Abigail Adams wrote, “I regret...how fashionable it has been to ridicule Female learning.” After the war, she and many others planned to do something about it. Private academies, which had educated white male leaders for a century, began to open their doors to women, or more often, separate private academies for women were founded like the Young Ladies’ Academy of Philadelphia that Benjamin Rush opened in 1787. Rush, whose views reflected his belief in the ideology of Republican Motherhood, believed that the “attention of our young ladies should be directed as soon as they are prepared for it to the reading of history, travels, poetry, and moral essays...to the present state of society in America.” When Priscilla Mason graduated from Rush’s Young Ladies’ Academy in 1794, however, she condemned the arbitrary limitations that “have denied us the means of knowledge, and then reproached us for the want of it.” She continued, “The Church, the Bar, and the Senate are shut against us.
Having lived through the Revolution in Massachusetts and become a leader in the Universalist churches, Judith Sargent Murray also came to be one of the strongest voices demanding absolute equality for women in the new nation.
Republican Motherhood
The belief that women should have more rights and a better education so that they might support husbands and raise sons who would actively participate in the political affairs of society.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 163
American Voices
Judith Sargent Murray, On the Equality of the Sexes, 1792
Judith Sargent Murray was born into a merchant family in
Massachusetts in 1751 and lived through the Revolution as a young woman. She was a leader of the Universalist movement in religion, which believed that all people were saved, a belief that led them to emphasize equality, including equality of the sexes. She argued that differences between the sexes were due to educational opportunities rather than inherent qualities, and she wanted an education that would make women the equals of their brothers, husbands, and sons. She argued that the way society constructed women's roles perpetuated the stereotype of women as overly emotional and not thoughtful. With an equal education, she insisted, women could at least equal men. Her most famous book, On the Equality of the Sexes, was published in 1792.
Is it upon mature consideration we adopt the idea, that nature is thus partial in her distributions? Is it indeed a fact, that she hath yielded to one half of the human species so unquestionable a mental superiority?...May we not trace its source in the difference of education...the one is taught to aspire, and the other is early confined and limited. As their years increase, the sister must be wholly domesticated, while the brother is led by the hand through all the flowery paths of science. Grant that their minds are by nature equal, yet who shall wonder at the apparent superiority, if indeed custom becomes second nature.... At length arrived at womanhood, the uncultivated fair one feels a void, which the employments allotted her are by no means capable of filling... .She experiences a mortifying consciousness of inferiority, which embitters every enjoyment....Now, was she permitted the same instructors as her brother, (with an eye however to their particular departments) for the employment of a rational mind an ample field would be opened....A mind, thus filled, would
have little room for the trifles with which our sex are, with too much justice, accused of amusing themselves, and they would thus be rendered fit companions for those, who should one day wear them as their crown....
Should it still be vociferated, "Your domestic employments are sufficient"—I would calmly ask, is it reasonable, that a candidate for immortality, for the joys of heaven, an intelligent being, who is to spend an eternity in contemplating the works of Deity, should at present be so degraded, as to be allowed no other ideas, than those which are suggested by the mechanism of a pudding, or the sewing the seams of a garment? Pity that all such censurers of female improvement do not go one step further, and deny their future existence; to be consistent they surely ought.
Yes, ye lordly, ye haughty sex, our souls are by nature equal to yours; the same breath of God animates, enlivens, and invigorates us; and that we are not fallen lower than yourselves.
Source: Judith Sargent Murray, "On the Equality of the Sexes," first published in the Massachusetts Magazine, April 1790, reprinted in Eve Kornfeld, Creating an American Culture, 1775-1800: A Brief History with Documents (Boston: Bedford St. Martin's, 2001), pp. 127-132.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What differences did Murray note between the education of boys and girls? What consequences did she attach to those differences?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What vision of republican womanhood did Murray support?
How did her vision differ from that embodied in the emerging ideology of Republican Motherhood?
Who shut them? Man, despotic man.” An education that produced such a speaker, may have been more than Rush envisioned when he proposed the school.
Women also took a more direct role in politics when they could. New Jersey’s 1776 Constitution gave women the right to vote, but the provision was repealed in 1807. Ihe Bill of Rights that was added to the federal Constitution in 1791 gave all citizens—women as well as men—the right to “petition the government for a redress of grievances,” and women regularly petitioned Congress and state legislatures. After the Revolution, women also gained significant new rights to control their own property, which they had not had before the war. It would be a long time before law and culture would support the equality that Abigail Adams or Judith Sargent Murray advocated. But attitudes had begun to change.
Within the ideology of Republican Motherhood, however, two double standards emerged. First, middle- and upper-class white women were expected to be the guardians of sexual morality. Men might stray, but, as a Philadelphia newspaper editorialized, “Ladies, much depends on you, towards a reformation in the morals of our sex.” And if men did stray, it was expected they would do so only with lower-class or poor white women or with blacks, slave or free. Second, servants and working women were
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Although it is often forgotten, New Jersey's 1776 state constitution gave that state's women the right to vote, a right they exercised enthusiastically until the provision was repealed in 1807.
not included in either the rules or the opportunities for education and influence that the ideal of Republican Motherhood gave to supposedly all women, but in reality the increasingly well-educated and active women of higher social and economic status.
Quick Review Did the Revolutionary War have a truly revolutionary effect on Britain's former colonies? Address the changes, or lack thereof, among at least two groups in your answer.
CREATING A GOVERNMENT: WRITING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION
Explain the needs, pressures, and compromises that led to writing and adopting the Constitution.
6.2
The years immediately after the Revolution were not easy ones in the new United States of America. Many Americans were unhappy with the situation in which they found themselves. Farmers were angry about taxes. Frontier whites and Indians fought for control of the land. Many women were agitating for their own rights. Some of the most famous revolutionary leaders, including Washington, Franklin, and Hamilton, were determined to end the growing chaos and reshape the new nation they had helped to create.
The Crisis of the 1780s: The Failure of the Articles of Confederation
The problems that the nation faced in the 1780s had many sources. Ihe Articles of Confederation that governed the nation were essentially a treaty among 13 independent nations. All 13 states needed to agree to levy any taxes, and 9 states had to agree to pass a law. Real sovereignty—in this case, the ability to make the most important decisions about how Americans should govern themselves and pay for their government—rested with the state governments.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 165
Annapolis Convention
Conference of state delegates that issued a call in September 1786 for a convention to consider changes to the Articles of Confederation.
For present-day citizens, who live in a world in which a national government rules almost every spot on the planet, such a loose federation may seem surprising. But for the revolutionary generation, the arrangement was not strange at all. The separate colonies had experienced over a century of independent relationships with London. Until the 1760s, the links between each colony and Britain were much stronger than the ties between the various colonies. When Americans looked to Europe, they saw that small independent states and cities were the rule in what is now Germany and Italy. In that context, viewing Massachusetts, New York, and Virginia as independent states that were linked only in a loose confederation did not seem odd.
Nevertheless, leading citizens were concluding that the American confederation was not working. They believed that it was too weak, the state legislatures too strong, and that this imbalance was causing serious problems. Unlike their European models, the American confederation had acted as a united front to achieve independence, and that effort had a ripple effect on subsequent actions. Under the treaty that ended the Revolution, the United States—all of the states together—had promised to pay debts that it had incurred during the war—pensions for soldiers as well as the repayment of loans to U.S. citizens and foreign creditors. But Congress had no money and could not seem to raise any, given the requirement that all 13 states agree to any tax. The credit rating of the new nation was dropping quickly, and the lack of faith in the government’s ability to pay its debts was strangling the national economy. If the government could not pay off the loans negotiated during the Revolution, many European creditors thought, why loan any more money to either the American government or American commercial enterprises?
The financial crisis had additional impacts. Indian tribes along the frontier were growing stronger, and the new nation risked losing control of its western lands because it could not afford a strong army to protect them. In 1785, a Shawnee leader, Piteasewa, told commissioners sent by the Congress, “We are aware of your design to divide our Councils, but we are unanimous.” Although the tribes were never actually unanimous, in the 1780s they were still more than a match for the U.S. Army or the various state militias.
Moreover, many state legislatures not only failed to raise taxes or pay their state debts but also often simply gave in when mobs of farmers like those in Massachusetts took control of the court houses and stopped trials of those who had failed to pay debts or taxes. Charles Lee, one of Virginia’s leading citizens, complained to George Washington in 1788 of the legislature’s willingness to grant too much tax relief: “the public debts and even private debts will in my opinion be extinguished by acts of the several Legislatures.”
In September 1786, five states sent delegates to a convention in Maryland-known as the Annapolis Convention—to try to deal with yet another weakness of the Articles of Confederation—economic rivalry between the states that had led to a battle over navigation rights on the Potomac River between Maryland and Virginia and to a violent boundary dispute between New York and what would become Vermont. Ihe convention never had a quorum and did no business, but it did give some leaders a chance to talk about the nation’s problems. As a result, Alexander Hamilton wrote to the Congress asking that the states appoint delegates to meet in Philadelphia in May 1787 “to devise such further provisions as should appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union.”
In February 1787, 5 months after receiving Hamilton’s letter, the Congress agreed to call a convention, but with limitations. They voted to ask the states to send delegates to Philadelphia “for the sole and express purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation, and reporting to Congress and the several legislatures such alterations and provisions therein as shall when agreed to in Congress and confirmed by the States, render the federal Constitution adequate to the exigencies of Government and the preservation of the Union.” On the surface, this call was hardly a mandate for wholesale change. But it launched the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and the Convention would far exceed its authority. Some, including Madison and Hamilton, planned it that way from the beginning. The result would be a radically different form of government than the one under which the United States had won its freedom.
Ill A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
The Constitutional Convention of 1787
The 55 white men who gathered in what later came to be known as Independence Hall in Philadelphia in spring of 1787 for the Constitutional Convention had instructions from Congress merely to propose amendments to the Articles of Confederation. The group represented the elite of the new nation. They had been appointed by 12 states; Rhode Islands legislature distrusted any effort to strengthen the central government and refused to send anyone to Philadelphia. Most were fairly young. Twenty-nine had college degrees at a time when that achievement was rare. Only eight had signed the Declaration of Independence in 1776. Except for George Washington and Benjamin Franklin, some of the most prominent leaders of the Revolution were absent. Virginias Patrick Henry and Massachusetts’s John Hancock and Sam Adams refused to attend because they, too, worried that the convention would undermine the rights of individual states. Jefferson was away as U.S. ambassador to France. John Adams was ambassador to Britain. Women and the rebels of western Massachusetts who had marched with Daniel Shays, slaves and free blacks, and American Indians were not represented. But in that summer gathering in 1787, the delegates produced a frame of government that has served the United States well for more than 200 years.
Constitutional Convention
Convention that met in Philadelphia in 1787 and drafted the Constitution of the United States.
DECISIONS ON THE STRUCTURE OF A UNIFIED GOVERNMENT
Coming to agreement at the Constitutional Convention involved long arguments and difficult compromises. The final result that the convention produced in September 1787 disappointed many. Surprisingly, all the delegates, even those who left in anger, kept to a pledge to keep their deliberations secret. All of the delegates wanted to be sure they had the time and freedom to talk through the difficult issues of the day without undue pressure from outside groups. No one outside the convention, including members of Congress that were still meeting in New York, had a clue what the distinguished group in Philadelphia would recommend. In the spring of 1787 delegates from 12 of the 13 states gathered in Independence Hall-now a national historic site—to write a new plan of government. After a summer of hard negotiations, they proposed what became the Constitution of the United States.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 167
Although he held no special office at the Constitutional Convention—serving simply as one of several delegates from Virginia—James Madison planned carefully and did his best to guide the convention's deliberations. His notes on the meeting provide the best record of what happened that summer.
Virginia Plan
The first proposal put forward at the Constitutional convention, which included two houses of Congress, both elected by proportional representation, and a national executive and judiciary.
separation of powers
A core aspect of the Constitution by which different parts of the new national government would have their authority always limited by other parts.
federalism
A system of government in which power is clearly divided between state governments and the national—or federal—government.
proportional representation
A way of selecting representatives in Congress based on the total population of a state, as opposed to having each state receive equal votes in Congress.
New Jersey Plan
A proposal of the New Jersey delegation to the Constitutional Convention by which both houses of Congress would be elected by states, with equal size delegations for every state.
Connecticut Plan—or the Great Compromise
Plan proposed for creating a national bicameral legislature in which all states would be equally represented in the Senate and proportionally represented in the House.
A relatively young delegate from Virginia, James Madison (1751-1836), who had served in the Virginia legislature during the Revolution and had authored the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom, was the key architect of the Constitution that emerged, although he never held a special office at the convention. In preparation for the convention, Madison privately arranged for the Virginia and Pennsylvania delegates to arrive in Philadelphia a week before the convention opened. He used that week to craft a plan that could be presented as soon as the convention got underway.
On May 29, the first day of business at the convention, Virginia’s Governor Edmund Randolph, following Madison’s plan, presented what came to be known as the Virginia Plan—the first outline of a new constitution. In Randolph’s plan, a new Congress with two houses, whose members would be elected based on proportional representation reflecting the population of the various states, would replace the current Congress. The new government would represent the people, not necessarily 13 equal states. If more people lived in certain states, especially Virginia and Massachusetts, then those states would have more votes in the Congress. The Congress would have the power to levy taxes, regulate interstate commerce, and veto state laws. Randolph also proposed creating a “national executive” and judiciary, or a set of federal courts.
The next day, May 30, the delegates endorsed a resolution from Pennsylvania’s Gouverneur Morris that “a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative, executive, and judiciary.” The basic outline of a strong new national government—one that included the separation of powers between the Congress, the executive branch, and the courts—had emerged quickly. The new system that Madison, Randolph, and Morris were proposing was also known as federalism, a system of government in which both the central national government and the individual state governments had real power, but in separate spheres of influence. But there would be many days of meetings in a hot and stuffy Independence Hall before the details would be resolved and the Constitution itself would be completed.
From the opening day, there was a battle between those, generally from larger states, who wanted the new Congress to have proportional representation—that is, representatives elected directly by the voters of districts based on the size of a state’s population—and those, generally from smaller states, who wanted Congress to be made up of representatives of the states themselves, so that each state would have an equal number of votes. The Virginia Plan called for proportional representation, but a subsequent plan put forward by New Jersey’s William Paterson—not surprisingly known as the New Jersey Plan—called for a Congress in which both houses would be made up of delegates elected by state legislatures with an equal number from each state. While the delegates from the largest states, especially James Madison and Edmund Randolph, insisted that proportional representation was essential to a strong and democratic national government, Paterson, along with delegates from Delaware and surprisingly some from New York and Massachusetts, insisted that members of Congress should represent only state governments and that each state should be treated equally.
A compromise, first proposed by Connecticut’s Roger Sherman—and sometimes called the Connecticut Plan—was to split the difference and create a House of Representatives with members elected by districts based on population and a Senate made up of two senators from each state no matter what its population, elected by the state legislature. But adopting this Great Compromise, which was the key to the future Constitution, did not come easily.
Other issues were even more difficult to resolve. The convention came to a standstill over the office of president. Everyone assumed that the convention’s presiding officer, George Washington, would be the first president in the new government, but few could agree on the details of the office or on how to select his successors. Some
^8 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
wanted an executive of several individuals in a cabinet of equals, while others insisted on a single leader. Most wanted to ensure that only the “wisest and best” citizens voted for the president, and almost none trusted the people to elect the president by a direct popular vote. But how to select the president—by the Congress, by state legislatures, or by some other formula—seemed impossible to resolve until Madison proposed the Electoral College. He suggested that each state select presidential electors according to the number of its senators and representatives in Congress by whatever method it preferred, and that these electors would then select the president. If a majority of the electors did not agree on any one candidate, the choice would fall to the House of Representatives—but with each state delegation in Congress having only one vote. This proposal seemed like a compromise that could work. The convention also decided on a 4-year term for the president, with no limit on the number of terms that could be served.
There were many arguments about how much power to give the president. Delegates remembered that they had just fought a war against the tyranny of George Ill’s government. On the other hand, after a decade of chaos, they wanted a strong executive who could make tough decisions and have the authority to make them stick. Ihe delegates compromised and agreed that the president could veto legislation, but that a two-thirds vote of each chamber of the Congress could override a veto. Those wanting a strong executive won, though it would fall to Washington and subsequent presidents to flesh out the job.
Ihe delegates spent almost no time on the judiciary. They created a Supreme Court and lower courts but left the details to subsequent generations. While they considered an arrangement whereby the judges of the Supreme Court and the president together might declare both federal and state laws unconstitutional they dropped the idea. Only later, after John Marshall became chief justice in 1800, did the Supreme Court take on its role as arbiter of the constitutionality of laws.
Electoral College
A system in which each state selects presidential electors according to the number of its senators and representatives in Congress by whatever method it prefers, and these electors then select the president.
6.2
The Effects of Slavery on a Unified Government
While the convention spent much of its time debating issues that divided large states from small ones, Madison understood that the real divide was between northern and southern states, or more specifically, between states where slavery was growing rapidly and those where it was dying out. Later, he remembered that “the institution of slavery and its implications formed the line of discrimination” on many issues. Ihe existence of slavery in the United States embarrassed most of the framers of the Constitution. They were careful not to use the words “slave” or “slavery” even once in the final document. But they were equally careful to protect the institution and appease slaveholders.
Madison, like his fellow Virginians, Jefferson and Washington, embodied all the contradictions of slavery. Madison owned slaves, yet despised slavery. He told the convention that the “distinction of color” represented the basis for “the most oppressive domination ever exercised by man over man.” Nevertheless, he later assured the Virginia convention that ratified the Constitution that the Constitution offered slavery “better security than any that now exists.” He was right in his assurance.
Although many of the delegates, including some who were slaveholders, understood that slavery was incompatible with “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,” they were willing to live with the contradiction. The framers of the Constitution were also willing to live with slavery because of their belief that a key to securing life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness was ensuring the inviolable right of private property. Slaves were seen, first, as the private property of their owners and only second as human beings, if as humans at all. For many at the convention, all private property, including property consisting of other humans, was sacrosanct. Without the security of property, they did not think any of their other rights were
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 169
6.1
6.2
three-fifths clause
Another compromise from the Constitutional Convention by which slaves—though the term was never used—would be counted as three-fifths of a person for purposes of establishing a state's representation under the proportional representation plan.
secure. They were willing to sacrifice their moral qualms about slavery to protect their rights to their own property.
The first time slavery intruded into the convention was when the delegates argued about representation in Congress. If representation was to be by population, then who would be counted as people? Defenders of slavery wanted slaves to be counted in equal numbers with free citizens in assigning seats in the House of Representatives to states. Delegates from states where slavery was shrinking or gone wanted to count only free citizens. Pennsylvania’s James Wilson offered a compromise resolution, quickly seconded by South Carolina’s Charles Pinckney (who owned more slaves than almost any other delegate), which said that representation in Congress would be apportioned:
In proportion to the whole number of white and other free Citizens and inhabitants of every age sex and condition including those bound to servitude for a term of years and three-fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description, except Indians not paying taxes, in each state.
Everyone knew that “all other persons” meant slaves. After further debates, the final document kept the three-fifths clause.
Some delegates objected. Pennsylvania’s Gouverneur Morris condemned the three-fifths clause as creating a situation in which
the inhabitant of Georgia and South Carolina who goes to the Coast of Africa, and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connection and damns them to the most cruel bondages, shall have more votes in a government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind, than the citizen of Pennsylvania or New Jersey who views with laudable horror so nefarious a practice.
But in the end, the “nefarious practice” won.
Moreover, the three-fifths clause was far from the only concession to slaveholders. When a committee was appointed to start drafting a document, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney warned them, “If the Committee should fail to insert some security to the Southern states against an emancipation of slaves, and taxes on exports, I will be bound by duty to my state to vote against the report.” He need not have worried. The first draft of the Constitution included a clause that said Congress could neither tax nor prohibit “the migration or importation of such persons as the several States shall think proper to admit.” “Such Persons” referred to slaves, and the insistence that Congress could not tax or prohibit their “migration or importation” meant that the new government could not use its power in interstate commerce to limit the slave trade. However, the wording of the final draft did allow Congress to change the policy after 1808, and when that year arrived, Congress did end the slave trade and stop the importation of slaves from Africa. Nevertheless, between 1787 and 1808, over 200,000 Africans were forcibly taken from Africa and sold into slavery in the American South. In that one short 21-year period, half as many slaves were brought to the United States as the 400,000 Africans who had been brought to America over the previous 177 years between 1610 and 1787.
The final compromise about slavery came quickly. The draft of the Constitution f prepared by the Committee of Detail had said that each state had an obligation to “deliver up” any person charged with a serious crime in another state. Delegates from South Carolina and Georgia asked the convention to add a clause that required “fugitive slaves and servants to be delivered up like criminals.” Delegates from Pennsylvania and Connecticut objected. However, when it came time to vote, the convention embraced the request without a single dissent. It was the end of August.
The delegates were tired and anxious to end their work. And the issue of slavery was just not as important to northerners as it was to southerners. As a result, the final version of the Constitution contained a clause (Article IV, Section 2) that
'0 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
required states to extradite criminals from one state to another and a separate clause that stated:
No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of any Law or Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour, but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may be due.
Once again, the word slavery did not appear, but the meaning of “Person held to Service or Labour” was slaves.
The fugitive slave clause gave slaveholders a new and powerful tool. As the 1800s wore on, it led to increasing strife because many northerners resented it, and southerners became angry at northern slowness in complying with one of the planks of the Constitution that united them.
The delegates who met in Philadelphia in 1787 compromised on many issues— slavery most of all—but one area where they did not compromise, despite the pleas of several delegates, would bedevil them for some time. On September 10, only a week before their final vote, George Mason of Virginia said he wished “the plan had been prefaced with a Bill of Rights,” a guarantee of freedom of speech, press, religion, trial by jury, and so on, that would “give great quiet to the people.” Mason had been the author of the Virginia Declaration of Rights, and he anticipated that the lack of a formal guarantee of rights in the final document would create strong opposition. But not a single state delegation approved Mason’s proposal, though several states now had their own bills of rights. Some delegates argued that such guarantees were unnecessary, but more of them were hot, tired, and ready to be done with their work. It was too late to add something new, but the failure to include a Bill of Rights in the original document almost derailed the whole plan for a new federal government.
Forty-one of the original 55 delegates gathered for the final vote. Edmund Randolph who had introduced the Virginia Plan to the convention would not sign the final document. The Constitution gave far more power to the federal government than he ever imagined it would. George Mason worried about the lack of a Bill of Rights. Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts objected to the Constitution because, first, the three-fifths clause gave too much power to slaveholding states and, second, the power to raise armies was a dangerous step toward a military establishment. The remaining 38 were ready to sign the document that began with these words:
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
Many perhaps agreed with Benjamin Franklin, who said that there were “several parts of this Constitution which I do not at present approve,” but “the older I grow the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment and pay more respect to the judgment of others.” And, he added a realistic note, “I doubt too whether any other Convention we can obtain may be able to make a better Constitution.
Debating and Adopting the Constitution
As mandated by the call to the Constitutional Convention, once the 38 delegates had signed the draft Constitution, it was sent to the Congress that was meeting in New York. Ten of the delegates from the Philadelphia convention were also members of that Congress, and they transported the document. The delegates meeting in Philadelphia had far exceeded their instructions to propose amendments to the Articles of Confederation, but those members of the Congress who had not
6.2
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 171
Federalists
Supporters of the Constitution; those who favored its ratification.
Antifederalists
Opponents of the Constitution; those who argued against its ratification.
participated in drafting the new document were in no mood for a fight. They simply sent the proposed Constitution to the states for their consideration, even though they understood that it replaced rather than amended the Articles of Confederation and were aware that the Constitution itself stated the conditions for its national launch: ratification by only 9 of the 13 states. However, the members of Congress did require that the battles about whether to adopt this radical new experiment in government would be fought on a state-by-state basis in conventions of specially elected delegates who would choose to ratify, or not ratify, the Constitution. This approach would increase the power of the voters in each state to decide instead of representatives in the political bodies of the legislatures. In the fall of 1787, the outcome was by no means clear.
To ensure that the document they had worked so hard to create actually became the fundamental law of the United States, delegates from the Constitutional Convention quickly went to work. James Madison, one of the chief architects of the new Constitution, set out to persuade the state conventions to adopt it. In the fall of 1787, he, along with Alexander Hamilton and John Jay—three leaders who did not normally get along with one another—wrote 85 newspaper articles to support the Constitution, later published as The Federalist Papers. In these articles, the three argued passionately that the new nation needed a strong national government and described the problems that they believed the Constitution addressed.
The Constitution’s advocates, who called themselves Federalists, entered the state conventions with important advantages. They had a specific document and specific arguments on how theirs was a clear plan for improving the government. The new Constitution addressed the fears of many who would vote for delegates to the conventions and sit in them. For those afraid of another Shays’s Rebellion, for those wanting a strong U.S. Army to protect them from Indians along the Allegheny frontier, and for those worried about the nation’s credit rating, the Constitution provided reassurances not found in the Articles of Confederation.
In contrast, for those known as Antifederalists, people who worried that a strong national government would trample on the rights of sovereign states and the liberties of individual (white, male) citizens, the Constitution offered little to calm their fears. The Constitution, which lacked a Bill of Rights and shifted significant powers from the states to the federal government, provoked attacks by many who had fought hardest against British authority in the Revolution. Like many Antifederalists, Virginia’s Richard Henry Lee feared that a new “consolidated government” had been created and would be dominated by a “coalition of monarchy men, military men, aristocrats, and drones.” Ratification would not be easy.
The Pennsylvania legislature, which met upstairs in the same building as the one the Constitutional Convention had met in, ordered the election of delegates even before Congress officially sent the Constitution to the states. Although backcountry farmers in Pennsylvania resisted strong government in any form, the majority of delegates to the Pennsylvania convention wanted to ratify the document and, if possible, be the first state to do so, possibly securing the seat of the national government in Pennsylvania. But while Pennsylvanians debated, a convention in Delaware unanimously adopted the Constitution after only 5 days of discussion, beating Pennsylvania as the first state to ratify. Delegates to New Jersey’s convention who liked the idea that taxes on imports arriving through New York Harbor would now be paid to the federal government instead of to the state of New York also ratified quickly. They were joined by Georgia, which wanted immediate protection from Indian raids, and by Connecticut, which had a strong Federalist party. Decisions among other states got more difficult.
172 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
American Voices
James Madison, The Federalist Papers, 1787, and Patrick Henry’s response, 1788
6.2
James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay published their Federalist Papers as individual pieces in newspapers in the fail and winter of 1787- 7 788. Hamilton wrote 51 of them; Madison, 29; Jay only 5. Madison's were among the most articulate arguments for a strong federal government, including his argument in Federalist No. 7 0 that a national government would reduce the danger of a political faction trampling on the liberties of others. These articles were later collected as a book, The Federalist Papers, and remain one of the most often cited descriptions of the meaning of the new Constitution. But not everyone was convinced by the arguments put forward by the Constitution's defenders in the Federalist Papers and in the various state conventions. There was opposition to adopting the Constitution in almost every state. In Virginia, Patrick Henry, one of the Constitution's staunchest opponents, gave a stirring speech against the proposed new form of government. Where Madison placed his faith in a strong federal government, Henry trusted state governments as more accountable to the people and therefore more likely to protect their liberty.
James Madison, Federalist No. 10, November 22,1787
Among the numerous advantages promised by a well constructed Union, none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control the violence of faction....
A zeal for different opinions concerning religion, concerning government, and many other points, as well of speculation as of practice; an attachment to different leaders ambitiously contending for pre-eminence and power; or to persons of other descriptions whose fortunes have been interesting to the human passions, have, in turn, divided mankind into parties, inflamed them with mutual animosity, and rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other than to co-operate for their common good. So strong is this propensity of mankind to fall into mutual animosities, that where no substantial occasion presents itself, the most frivolous and fanciful distinctions have been sufficient to kindle their unfriendly passions....But the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property. Those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society. Those who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like discrimination. A landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into different classes....
A rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any other improper or wicked project, will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the Union than a particular member of it; in the same proportion as such a malady is more likely to taint a particular county or district, than an entire State.
In the extent and proper structure of the Union, therefore, we behold a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to
republican government. And according to the degree of pleasure and pride we feel in being republicans, ought to be our zeal in cherishing the spirit and supporting the character of Federalists.
Patrick Henry, "Speech against the Federal
Constitution," June 5,1788
Patrick Henry, a firebrand during the Revolution, spoke to the Virginia Convention called in 1788 to consider ratifying the Constitution. Although Madison tried hard to persuade him to support the document, Henry was adamant in his opposition.
Here is a resolution as radical as that which separated us from Great Britain....The rights of conscience, trial by jury, liberty of the press, all your immunities and franchises, all pretensions to human rights and privileges are rendered insecure, if not lost, by this change, so loudly talked of by some, and inconsiderately by others. Is this tame relinquishment of rights worthy of freemen? Is it worthy of that manly fortitude that ought to characterize republicans?...
Guard with jealous attention the public liberty. Suspect everyone who approaches that jewel. Unfortunately, nothing will preserve it but downright force. Whenever you give up that force, you are inevitably ruined....We are come hither to preserve the poor commonwealth of Virginia, if it can be possibly done: something must be done to preserve your liberty and mine.
The Confederation, this same despised government, merits, in my opinion, the highest encomium: it carried us through a long and dangerous war; it rendered us victorious in that conflict with a powerful nation; it has secured us a territory greater than any European monarch possesses; and shall a government which has been thus strong and vigorous, be accused of imbecility, and abandoned for want of energy?...
I am not well versed in history, but I will submit to your recollection, whether liberty has been destroyed most often by the licentiousness of the people, or by the tyranny of rulers. I imagine, sir, you will find the balance on the side of tyranny....
Before you abandon the present system, I hope you will consider not only its defects, most maturely, but likewise those of that which you are to substitute for it. May you be fully apprized of the dangers of the latter, not by fatal experience, but by some abler advocate than I!
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to Madison, what led to the emergence of political factions? Why did he think a strong federal government would limit the impact of factions?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Compare and contrast Madison's and Henry's views on the new Constitution. What do they tell you about how each man saw the challenges and dangers facing the new nation?
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 173
6.2
THINKING HISTORICALLY
James Madison vs. Patrick Henry
Madison said he wanted a strong national government because, while a political faction might capture a particular state, there was far less chance of such a group capturing the national government. Thus, he saw a strong national government as the best means of protecting liberty. In opposing adoption of the Constitution, Patrick Henry had the opposite fear, that a strong national government would not only be distant from the people, but would lead inevitably to a loss of "the rights of conscience, trial by jury, liberty of the press, all your immunities and franchises," which were best protected by state and local governments.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
Looking back over the story of the American Revolution and this chapter what sorts of liberties do you think Madison and Henry were worried about? Whose liberty was more—or less—important to them?
2.	Crafting an Argument
How did the proposed Constitution—without the Bill of Rights—protect or threaten liberties? Two hundred years later, whose fears do you think were more justified, Madison's or Henry's? Why?

nrn
In Massachusetts, the outcome was far from certain. Although reaction to the rebellion of western Massachusetts farmers had helped launch the Constitution, these farmers themselves sent delegates to Boston who did not trust “these lawyers, and men of learning, and moneyed men, that talk so finely, and gloss over matters so smoothly, to make us poor little people swallow down the pill,” as an Antifederalist delegate said. Two of the state’s most respected revolutionaries—Governor John Hancock, whose name was at the top of the Declaration of Independence, and Sam Adams of Boston Tea Party fame—believed that the Constitution sought to solve problems that were not serious and that the states, not the national government, were best situated to protect individual liberty. In the end, the Massachusetts convention adopted the Constitution by a close vote of 187 to 168 but only on the condition, as Adams insisted, that it be immediately amended to further protect the people’s liberties and the rights of state governments. The Constitutional Convention’s failure to add a Bill of Rights to the Constitution was already creating problems.
The next states to consider the document faced even more difficulties. The ratifying convention in New Hampshire adjourned without taking action. In addition, just as they had refused to attend the Constitutional Convention, the Rhode Island legislature refused even to call a convention. (They did, however, submit the question to town meetings in the state, and the voters rejected it, 2,708 to 237.) Maryland’s convention approved the document, but also called for 28 amendments to limit the power of the federal government. South Carolina approved the Constitution despite delegates’ fears about “the interests of the Northern states” and the federal government’s potential to limit that state’s “peculiar species of property” (slaves). Because of these fears, South Carolina’s convention voted for an amendment that would guarantee that states “retain every power not expressly relinquished by them.”
Virginia, the largest state in the Union, was divided. Madison and Washington were strong advocates for the Constitution. But others were not enthusiastic. George Mason worried about the lack of a Bill of Rights. Patrick Henry, perhaps the most respected Virginian after Washington, adamantly opposed the Constitution. His loyalty was to the sovereign state of Virginia. He was willing to be part of a loose federation of states, but only one that ensured that real authority rested with a government
174 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
“ When opposite ^Bowling Qr&en, the president and members of Congress were discovered standing upon the fort, and the Ship instantly brought to. and tired a salute of thirteen guns, followed by three cheers, ushioh were returned by the Congressional dignitaries ^age
■MHMHMNWMNHmMM
As it became clear that the Constitution would be ratified and that the country would have a new and
stronger government, crowds celebrated. In spite of the strong opposition to the Constitution, once it
became law, most Americans supported it, though many also insisted that a Bill of Rights be added as
quickly as possible.
close enough to its citizens to ensure their rights. In the end, Virginia ratified the Constitution in June 1788, partly because its opponents were split among themselves. Virginia’s convention also demanded a Bill of Rights as soon as possible. With the vote in Virginia and a positive vote in a reconvened convention in New Hampshire earlier that same month, the Constitution was ratified, having reached its quota of nine states to support it.
Although enough states had supported ratification to launch the Constitution, no national government could thrive without New York. New York was already emerging as the financial center of the new nation, and the state sat in a strategic location between New England and the rest of the country. The New York convention debate was long and bitter. Alexander Hamilton led the charge for the Constitution, but Antifederalists were strong in New York. Given what was happening in other states, it would have been hard for New York to reject the Constitution, especially when many New Yorkers still hoped that the federal capital would remain in New York City. In the summer of 1788, the New York convention considered 55 possible amendments, a call for a second convention to revise the Constitution after its adoption, and a conditional vote that would ratify the document only /fit were amended. In the end, however, by a slim margin (30-27), New York ratified the Constitution in July 1788, the 11th state to do so.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 175
The last states to ratify the Constitution, North Carolina and Rhode Island, made their choice only after the new government was already functioning. By the time they acted, there was no practical way for any state to remain outside of the new United States or its government. Refusing to ratify would have made a state a foreign government amid the formal United States. It remained for Americans to translate the document into an actual government and work out their complex relationships across divisions of class, race, gender, and degrees of freedom and nonfreedom as well as the extraordinary distances in geography and belief that separated them.
Quick Review What failures of the Articles of Confederation did the Constitution address?
CONCLUSION
With the end of the Revolution and the recognition of American independence, the government of the new United States now faced the same problem that had faced the British royal government in the past: how to pay for a war and how to govern a restive populace enjoying both the benefits and disappointments of their liberty. Officers in the Continental Army threatened to rebel when payment for their services was not forthcoming. Poor farmers, some of whom had served in the army during the Revolution and had never been paid, suffered because an influx of expensive imported goods that came with the wars end created an economic depression. Many began petitioning state legislatures for relief and resorted to rebellion when that approach failed. From New York and Pennsylvania to the Carolinas and Georgia, various Native American tribes challenged the new United States as white settlers streamed over the Allegheny Mountains into territory that the British government had kept off limits before the Revolution. At the same time, Congress began to resolve states’ claims to lands far into the interior, creating new states and territories for white settlers.
The issues of freedom and liberty that had rallied a new nation also took hold with slaves, and they and some white allies increasingly began to call for changes. Northern states, where slavery was less essential to the economy, slowly began to phase out slavery, but southern states, whose economic base depended on slave labor, were adamantly against emancipation and imported record numbers of new slaves. In addition, women in all levels of society began to expect more equal treatment and broader opportunities, particularly the right to education. Women’s expectations were translated in the male-dominated society to an ideology of Republican Motherhood in which women were expected to be better educated than their mothers and grandmothers but only so they could support the political development of their husbands and sons.
Many believed that at the core of many of the new nation’s problems was the fact that the governing document for the United States, the Articles of Confederation, was too weak a foundation on which to base a central government, in part, because it lacked the means to support itself through any kind of taxation. The Constitutional Convention that met over the summer of 1787 had been tasked by Congress to revise the Articles of Confederation. Instead, the representatives debated and designed a completely new Constitution, a very different document laying out a new form of government with three branches of government: an executive branch, including the president and cabinet; a legislative branch, consisting of two houses of Congress; and a judicial branch, including a Supreme Court. A key purpose of this design was to balance power, preventing one person or group from dominating the government while at the same time giving the national government the authority to act.
176 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
In many ways, the U.S. Constitution reflected the needs and aspirations of its creators—white men who were the elite of their society. Although the Constitution’s language never used the terms slave or slavery, the ideas and points within it upheld the institution, a benefit to many of the Constitution’s creators.
When the Constitution was presented to Congress for approval, Congress mandated that each state should call a special convention of delegates specifically elected to ratify, or not ratify, the document. As laid out in the body of the Constitution itself, a total of nine states would be needed to launch this new form of government. Throughout the states, debate was heated. Federalists and Antifederalists (supporters and opponents of the Constitution) took strong and contentious stands. Eventually, all states ratified the document, some by very narrow margins. No state wanted to be left behind on its own. However, no state found the document to be completely acceptable, and demands were strong to amend it immediately, particularly, by adding a Bill of Rights to protect all citizens. But by 1788, even before those changes were enacted and even before the last two states had ratified the Constitution, a new form of government for the United States was ready to be launched.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
Does the Constitution created in Philadelphia in 1787 embody or contradict the goals of the Revolution? Why?
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 177
Chapter 6 Chapter Review
6.1
THE STATE OF THE NATION AT WAR'S END______________________
Explain how the outcome of the American Revolution affected different groups in the new United States.
Review Questions
1.	Historical Interpretation
What light do the Newburgh conspiracy and Shays’s Rebellion shed on the economic challenges facing the new nation at the conclusion of the Revolutionary War? What do they suggest about the connection between economic problems and political divisions during the period?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the situation of African-Americans, both enslaved and free, in the northern states, the middle states, and the southern states in the decades following the American Revolution. What might explain the differences you note?
3.	Contextualization
How did revolutionary ideology shape ideas about gender roles in the late 1700s and early 1800s?
6.2
CREATING A GOVERNMENT: WRITING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION___________________________________________
Explain the needs, pressures, and compromises that led to writing and adopting the Constitution.
Review Questions
4.	Historical Interpretation
What role did economic issues play in prompting calls for the creation of a stronger central government?
5.	Crafting an Argument
Is it fair to describe the Constitution, as ratified in 1788, asa proslavery document? Why or why not?
6.	Contextualization
Why did Antifederalists view the Constitution as a threat to liberty? How did the experience of British colonial rule shape their views?
m new birth of Freedom-
-Creating the United States of America,


H
■B

President George Washington reviews troops at Fort Cumberland on the Potomac before leading them to suppress the Whiskey Rebellion. Frederick Kemmelmeyer, "General George Washington Reviewing the Western Army at Fort Cumberland the 18th of October 1794," after 1794. Oil on paperbacked with linen, 18 1/8x23 1/8. Courtesy of Winterthur Museum.
When New Hampshire and Virginia voted to ratify the Constitution in June 1788, it became the law of the land. But putting that new law into effect was not easy. The old Congress as well as local and state officials in the 13 states needed to conduct elections. Those elected to the new positions, as members of the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate and as the new president, would breathe life into the words of the Constitution and set precedents based on their interpretation of its meaning—or their preferences—that would last for generations. Different Americans, however, interpreted the Constitution differently. Americans discovered that they wanted the country to develop in diverse ways and began long-term arguments with one another about policy.
Soon after the new Congress was elected, it created and enacted the
Bill of Rights, 10 amendments that many thought should have been part of the original document. With this addition, more Americans felt comfortable that they had created a government that would protect their rights and maintain their freedom. Once elected as president, George Washington quickly set out to define this important American role. He appointed the first members of the Supreme Court and other judges and created a presidential cabinet to carry out the work of his administration. One cabinet member, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, laid the foundation for the nation’s economic system. Washington himself asserted federal authority and expanded the U.S. Army to win Indian Wars on the nation’s frontier. Washington’s vice president, John Adams, and his secretary of state, Thomas Jefferson, who would later become the next two presidents, worked together in this early government, but eventually became bitter rivals whose arguments represented different directions for the country.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the federal government worked under the new Constitution.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
CONVENING A CONGRESS,
INAUGURATING A PRESIDENT, ADOPTING A BILL OF RIGHTS
Analyze the first federal elections and the adoption of the Bill of Rights.
CREATING AN ECONOMY: ALEXANDER HAMILTON AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC SYSTEM
Analyze the enduring argument begun by Hamilton's economic vision for the United States and the alternative vision of Jefferson and Madison.
SETTING THE PACE: THE WASHINGTON ADMINISTRATION
Explain the precedents set by George Washington's presidential administration.
THE BIRTH OF POLITICAL PARTIES:
ADAMS AND JEFFERSON
Explain the growing split between the Federalist and Democratic-Republican Parties, including how the French Revolution and the personal differences between Hamilton, Adams, and Jefferson affected American politics.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 179
Significant Dates
New House and Senate elected
George Washington elected and inaugurated as first U.S. president French Revolution begins
Federal government assumes state Revolutionary War debts
Washington, D.C., selected permanent U.S. capital (the government actually moved there in 1800)
Judith Sargent Murray's "On the Equality of the Sexes" published Bill of Rights ratified
First Bank of the United States chartered
Ohio Indian tribes defeat U.S. Army in Northwest Territory Hamilton's Report on Manufactures Washington reelected president
Citizen Genet arrives as ambassador to the United States
1793-1794 Whiskey Rebellion
1794	Western Indian Confederacy is defeated at Battle of Fallen Timbers
Jay's Treaty negotiated between the United States and Britain (ratified by the Senate in 1795 and effective in 1796)
1795	Treaty of Greenville ends Indian Wars on Ohio frontier
Pinckney's Treaty with Spain
1796	John Adams elected president
1797	Beginning of the Quasi-War with	France
XYZ
Affair Congress passes Alien and Sedition Acts
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions declare Alien and Sedition Acts unconstitutional
1799	George Washington dies
1800	Adams concludes peace with France and signs Judiciary Act
The policies that were set and institutions that were created during the first years of the new government lasted for decades, but the philosophical differences about the role of government in the nation’s life that emerged have persisted to the present.
CONVENING A CONGRESS, INAUGURATING A PRESIDENT, ADOPTING A BILL OF RIGHTS
7.1
Jefferson defeats Adams for president
Analyze the first federal elections and the adoption of the Bill of Rights.
In one of its last acts under the Articles of Confederation, the outgoing Congress set the dates for elections for the House of Representatives, the Senate, and presidential electors to occur in early 1789. The Constitution left it to each state legislature to decide how to manage these elections. No one had conducted elections like these before, and it took time to work out the process.
Elections for members of the House were held in January and February of 1789. As permitted in the Constitution, different states had different rules for who could vote. Some House races were hotly contested, including the one in Virginia’s fifth district that pitted two future U.S. presidents, James Madison and James Monroe, against each other. Madison won and played a crucial role in the first Congress. State legislatures then elected the members of the U.S. Senate, as they would do until 1913. Presidential electors were chosen by different methods depending on the state, and they cast their ballots for the first president.
Congress and President Washington: Setting to Work
By early spring, the new Congress began to assemble in the nation’s temporary capital, New York City (the location that many of its residents hoped would become permanent). Congress was supposed to convene on March 4, but it was not until April that either house of Congress could muster a quorum—a majority of the total members, which was required to do business. Much business awaited. The Constitution required each house to set up its own rules of operation. The Senate had to confirm the election of the president. The Constitution also gave the new government the power to set and collect taxes. The need for a tax law was urgent: each day that Congress delayed, thousands of dollars went uncollected.
On April 14, Charles Thomson, the secretary of Congress, arrived at Mount Vernon to officially inform George Washington of what he already knew: he had been unanimously elected president of the United States by the 69 presidential electors who also elected John Adams as vice president though by a smaller vote. Washington quickly traveled to New York where he and Adams were formally inaugurated on April 30, 1789. He then set to work creating the executive branch of the federal government.
The 58-year-old George Washington had no precedents to guide him. An independent republic with an elected citizen at its head was an unprecedented development for the world of 1789. Some, led by Alexander Hamilton who loved British models, recommended that Washington establish a court similar to that of King George III. Others, including Vice President John Adams, recommended a more egalitarian approach. Washington steered a middle course, insisting on formal state dinners and fairly formal relationships with those who came to call on him, but avoiding a throne or robes of office. He was called simply “Mr. President” instead of “your Highness.” Although he was the only president never to live in the White House, he did help to design it, although African slaves did most of the work building it. While in office, he maintained a formal presidential residence in New York City and in Philadelphia when the capital moved there in 1790.
The Bill of Rights
On May 4,1789, only a month after the House of Representatives had begun its work, James Madison told the House that he would soon fulfill his promise and propose amendments to the Constitution. On June 8, he offered amendments that included line-by-line changes in the Constitution. Proposing amendments was easy. Getting them passed was not. Some of Madisons strongest partners in getting the Constitution adopted were neutral or hostile to amending it. President Washington, at Madisons request, made a brief reference to amendments in his inaugural address. Later, Washington said of the proposed amendments “Some of them, in my opinion, are importantly necessary, others, though of themselves (in my conception) not very essential, are necessary to quiet the fears of some respectable characters and well-meaning men.” It was hardly a ringing endorsement. On the other hand, some Federalists in Congress thought it was far too early to amend the Constitution, especially when other issues, like balancing the budget, were pressing.
During the ratification process, however, Madison had promised to add a Bill of Rights to the Constitution, guaranteeing citizens important rights under a federal government. Without a promise for those added rights, key states would not have ratified the Constitution. While he was determined to fulfill his promise, Madison also knew that Antifederalists sought more far-reaching changes, and he wanted to act faster than those opponents. Representative Iheodorick Bland, a close ally of Patrick Henry, proposed a second convention to consider “the defects of this Constitution.” If Congress did not act to quiet this movement, the whole constitutional structure could unravel.
Madison quickly abandoned his original proposal for new clauses to be included throughout the body of the Constitution and decided instead to propose amendments to be added at the end of the document. The House initially passed 17 amendments, but the Senate changed them, and on September 25, Congress sent 12 amendments to the states for ratification. It was fast work for a body that had not existed 6 months earlier. An amendment setting the size of the House was not ratified; neither was an amendment limiting Congressional pay (it was ratified finally in 1992). The other 10 amendments became the Bill of Rights, added to the Constitution in 1791 after three-fourths of the state legislatures approved them. The
Bill of Rights
The first 10 amendments to the Constitution passed by Congress in 1789 and ratified by the states in 1791.
first of these amendments said:
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Other of the amendments included “the right of the people to keep and bear Arms,” freedom from being required to house soldiers in private homes (a major grievance against the British before the Revolution), the right to be “secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures,” the right to trial by jury, the right to a speedy trial, and limits on excessive bail.
Finally, the Tenth Amendment—perhaps most important to many Antifederalists, especially those who worried about federal intervention in the institution of slavery—limited the powers of the national government:
The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.
The Methodist Church on John Street in New York City is the oldest Methodist Church in the United States. Since Methodist and Baptist churches never received public support in any of the former colonies, they were among the strongest supporters of the prohibition on any Congressional action to create a state church for the United States that was included in the Bill of Rights.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 181
180 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United
States of America, 1754-1800
73
The Constitution had replaced a weak national government with a strong one, but the amendments meant that the new government would operate within clear limits.
7.1
Quick Review Why was the Bill of Rights added to the Constitution?
7.2
73
CREATING AN ECONOMY: ALEXANDER HAMILTON AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC SYSTEM____________________
Analyze the enduring argument begun by Hamilton's economic vision for the United States and the alternative vision of Jefferson and Madison.
7.2
President Washington faced difficult problems, many of them economic. The inability of the federal government under the Articles of Confederation to collect taxes meant that federal debts were not being paid and that the financial status of the United States was in serious trouble. The government could not afford an army sufficient to protect the frontier. Tensions with Britain were made worse because Britain had not withdrawn its troops from western forts as promised in the Treaty of Paris and because London merchants who were owed large sums from Americans were angry. Although the Continental Congress had adopted the dollar as the national currency in 1785, there was no official currency; Congress, state governments, and private banks had printed a variety of paper notes, all of which could be easily counterfeited, and the ease with which they were put into circulation led to inflation. In the new United States, as during much of the colonial era, people bought and sold with an amazing variety of paper notes and coins from around the world, especially Spanish gold and silver. Solving the financial crisis and regulating the currency was essential for national prosperity.
In the summer of 1789, Congress adopted a five percent customs tax on all imports into the United States, creating a solid financial footing for the new government. It also set up a system of federal courts and approved the establishment of four senior positions within the executive branch: secretaries of state, war, and the treasury, and an attorney general. These four officials became the first presidential cabinet.
Washington quickly appointed Thomas Jefferson, then U.S. Ambassador to Paris, as his secretary of state; General Henry Knox, his deputy in command throughout the Revolution, as secretary of war; and his friend, the former governor of Virginia, Edmund Randolph, as attorney general. But given the nations financial problems, the most important and powerful position would be secretary of the treasury, and to that office, Washington appointed New Yorker Alexander Hamilton. A brilliant and ruthless political infighter, Hamilton could handle the economic crisis better than anyone else, even if Washington also knew from bitter experience that he could never completely trust Hamilton, who had served as Washington’s chief aide during the Revolution and had sometimes gone behind his commander’s back or quarreled directly with him.
The Secretary of the Treasury's Key Role
On his first full day on the job, Secretary Hamilton negotiated a $50,000 loan from the Bank of New York to keep the new government solvent. He also set about creating a Customs Service to collect the five percent import tax that Congress had already passed, and he organized what would become the U.S. Coast Guard to be sure that imports were not smuggled into the country without being taxed. Hamilton had once said, I hate procrastination in business,” and he was not about to make a slow start on the new job. Ten days after his appointment, the House of Representatives asked him for a report on the public credit of the United States-the most pressing national issue m virtually everyone’s view-and gave him until January to prepare it.
182 Part III A New Birth of Freedom-Creating the United States of America J 754-1800
Debt and Taxes
Hamiltons Report Relative to a Provision for the Support of Public Credit was the foundation of the economic development of the new nation. Hamilton had read widely in philosophy and economics, as if preparing for the moment when he would be asked to design a new economic system. As he looked at the crushing debt that the nation faced from the Revolution—$54 million in federal debt and $25 million more in state debts—he knew that radical action was required. Few people, including foreign and domestic investors and foreign governments, trusted the new country’s ability to pay its bills. As a result, neither the state and federal governments nor private businesses could borrow money. The government could not finance desperately needed activities, including the creation of an army. Private businesses could not restart commerce, which had been mostly frozen since the Revolution. Revolutionary War veterans who had been paid in government promissory notes had sold them for as little as 15 cents on the dollar rather than trust a government that seemed untrustworthy to pay what it had promised. In this crisis, Hamilton saw only one solution. The federal government, he believed, needed to assume all of the Revolutionary War debt—state and federal— and promise to pay it all off, dollar for dollar, while establishing a tax policy that would show wary observers that the government would meet its obligations. “Credit is the entire thing,” Hamilton argued.
Not everyone in Congress agreed. To Hamilton’s surprise, his close ally in the fight over adopting the Constitution, James Madison, led the opposition to debt assumption in the House, and more quietly, Secretary of State Jefferson led similar opposition within the administration. States like Virginia and North Carolina that had paid off most of their own war debts were unhappy with the idea that they would pay taxes to cover the debts of what they considered less responsible states like Massachusetts and South Carolina. Veterans who had sold their government promissory notes at highly depreciated rates during the 1780s to eat and live were appalled that the civilian speculators to whom they had sold them would get rich on the 100 percent payment of the debt. And for those who shared Jefferson’s view of a democratic nation of small farmers, Hamilton’s plan created a national government that was too big, would raise too much in taxes, sustain a standing army, and shift power from farmers to urban and commercial interests. They would have none of it.
In the spring of 1790, the House, led by Madison, rejected Hamilton’s proposals each of four times he submitted it. Ever the wily politician, Hamilton sought a compromise and Secretary of State Jefferson made it happen. Many years later, Jefferson told the story of how he hosted a dinner at his home in New York at which he, Madison, and Hamilton struck a deal by which each one got something that he considered important. Hamilton wanted New York City, his home and the nation’s commercial center, to be the permanent U.S. capital. But others—especially Jefferson and Madison—wanted to locate the capital further south. They disliked the difficult travel to New York, and they also disliked urban life. They feared that a northern capital would fuel northern antislavery tendencies in Congress. Not incidentally, Madison, like George Washington, owned land on the Potomac River that would become more valuable if the capital were nearby. If Hamilton would agree to support Jefferson and Madison on the location of the capital, then the two Virginians would support Hamilton’s economic plan.
In July, Congress made the compromise official. Philadelphia, not New York, was designated as the new temporary capital and the law also stipulated that a 10-square-mile site on the Potomac River between Maryland and Virginia should become the nation’s permanent capital. They gave President Washington a free hand to select the specific site and plan the new center of government. Congress also passed Hamilton’s financial plan, including the assumption of state debts by the federal government. Henceforth, the new nation would have a government on a solid financial footing with a guaranteed credit rating, just as Hamilton wanted.
This painting of Alexander Hamilton (ca. 1804) was done by the artist John Trumbull after Hamilton had left office. Hamilton's fiscal program was controversial from the beginning but it launched the nation's economy in a commercial direction and also created political division that continued for decades in the United States.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 183
7.1
72
73
7A
The compromise solved the immediate issues, but the split on economic policy would lead to the creation of two hostile political parties—which came to be known as the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans (known at first as Antifederalists)— that would dominate the nation’s politics for the next decade. In the first years of the new government, those who supported the Constitution called themselves Federalists (wanting a strong federal government), and those opposed to the adoption of the Constitution and then Hamiltons interpretation of it were happy to be known simply as Antifederalists. But as the battle over Hamilton’s plans intensified, those in the government and the newspapers who supported Madison’s and Jefferson’s opposition began to call themselves Democratic-Republicans, claiming that they, not those following Hamilton, were the true defenders of the republic. Most everyone, including Hamilton, Jefferson, Madison, and especially Washington, abhorred the idea of opposing political parties, but such parties were beginning to form before Washington finished his first term in office, though no one yet called them that.
To a degree, the political divisions reflected a sectional split. Supporting Hamilton were bankers in New York and Philadelphia as well as merchants, especially those engaged in seagoing trade based in Boston or other ports. Those tending to support the Democratic-Republican cause included southern plantation owners, who always worried that the new government would move against slavery and who saw little value in banks and commercial development; farmers, ranging from supporters of Daniel Shays in Massachusetts to farmers in the backwoods of Kentucky; and small-town merchants who were less dependent on international credit. Supporters of each side also had their own newspaper. John Fenno had launched the Gazette of the United States in 1789 to support the Federalist cause. Two years later, Madison and Jefferson convinced Philip Freneau to launch the staunchly Antifederalist National Gazette. To support that paper, Jefferson, to his later embarrassment, also put Freneau on the federal payroll as an official of the State Department. The lines between two groups were growing stronger.
The First Bank of the United States
Once he had resolved the debt issue, Hamilton’s next move widened the divide between those who, like him, wanted an activist government and a robust commercial economy and those who preferred Jefferson’s vision of an agrarian nation made up of small independent farmers with a very modest national government. In December 1790,
Bank of the United States	Hamilton submitted another report to Congress that called for creating a Bank of
The first federal bank, chartered in 1781,	the United States, modeled on the Bank of England. Hamilton’s fondness for British
issued currency for the country and stabilized models wag on£ r£ason Americans never trusted him But Hamilton did not want the economy.	'
to be part of Britain. He wanted to use Britain’s economic model to build a nation that would become as powerful as Britain. Achieving that vision meant creating a federal bank that would manage the economy and fund a strong government, as Britain’s bank did for that country. As with the debt, not everyone agreed.
The Bank of England was a joint public-private venture. Most of its shareholders were private investors, but it played a key role in guaranteeing and repaying Britain’s public debt, and its paper bank notes were accepted as official currency in Britain. Hamilton did not trust Congress or the states to issue paper currency. He feared—all too realistically, given what had happened during the Revolution—that Congress and the states would solve financial problems by printing more currency and, thus, quickly debase its value and re-create the inflation that the nation faced in the 1790s. But Hamilton was confident that no investors would risk their funds by allowing more currency to circulate than they could afford to redeem. He was anxious to have those Americans who had funds to invest become strongly attached to the new government. Currency from a semiprivate bank could be trusted because the bank would have to redeem its paper currency in gold or silver. Hamilton believed the United States could have a stable currency that everyone trusted if the Bank of the United States were chartered.
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
The 1799 building that was designed for the First Bank of the United States in Philadelphia reflected the solid structure and grand hopes that Hamilton had for his bank.
A central bank could also make loans, thus expanding the amount of credit available. With resources backed by both private investors and government guarantees, the bank could ease the credit squeeze and stimulate commerce and trade. Businesses could get loans. Investment in new enterprises could begin. Much of the bank’s financing would also be promissory notes from the government itself—notes that Hamilton had just guaranteed would maintain their full value.
For southern plantation owners like Jefferson and Madison, the bank plan was much worse than the plan to assume all debt for the Revolutionary War. The bank plan would centralize power in the big northern cities—Philadelphia, New York, and Boston—where the nation’s largest banks were. Jefferson did not like cities. He preferred small rural communities, which he believed were far more democratic places. He said, “I think our governments will remain virtuous for many centuries as long as they are chiefly agricultural.” And, he continued, when people “get piled upon one another in large cities, as in Europe, they will become corrupt as in Europe.” In addition, Jefferson, like most Democratic-Republicans of his day, did not like banks. The battle over the Bank of the United States was a key battle in a war between those who wanted an urban commercial nation and those who wanted a nation based on independent farmers. It would not be the last such battle.
Jefferson feared that banks would keep the poor in poverty and enrich those who were already wealthy through ill-gotten gains based on speculation rather than hard work. For most farmers, who were always in debt given their need to buy seed and fertilizer before they could plant and harvest a crop, banks were the distant institutions that hounded them to repay loans. For Jefferson and Madison, and even for John Adams, the thought that the government they had worked so hard to create was now about to create a bank was galling. Although Hamilton and Madison had both helped write and defend the Constitution, they now parted company forever over their interpretation of it.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 185
1A
Despite the opposition of some of the nation’s most eloquent leaders, the bank bill sailed through Congress. Almost all northern representatives voted for it, and almost all southern ones against it. The sectional lines, and the lines between the Federalist and Democratic-Republican factions (they were not yet political parties) were clearly emerging.
Once the bill passed both houses of Congress, Washington had to decide whether to sign it. For Madison, who had been operating as Washington’s key spokesperson in Congress, the bank was an unconstitutional extension of federal power, and he argued privately and persuasively that Washington should veto the bill. Washington then turned to his cabinet for advice. Attorney General Randolph and Secretary of State Jefferson both urged a veto. The Tenth Amendment was clear, they said, that anything not mentioned in the Constitution was left to the states, and the Constitution certainly did not authorize a federal bank. For Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton, however, the bank was essential, and the Constitution, he said, gave Congress the authority to do everything “necessary and proper” for the smooth functioning of the nation. He warned Washington that if the national government did not invoke the “necessary and proper clause,” then Americans would become “a people governed without government ” Washington signed the bill in February 1791, and the United States now had a bank and deeper political divisions than previously imagined.
After the bank bill, Hamilton proposed a federal mint to create uniform coins for use throughout the country. For almost 20 years after the Revolution, people had used foreign coins. Hamilton wanted U.S. coins based on the U.S. dollar, not the British pound. It was not a controversial proposal, and the federal mint was soon established. With the mint in place, Hamilton resigned as Secretary of the Treasury in 1795, and Washington appointed Oliver Wolcott in his place. Though he remained a close presidential advisor until the end of Washington’s term, Hamilton preferred to make money as a private citizen.
Hamilton's Commercial Nation vs. Jefferson's Agrarian Vision
Hamilton’s last major report to Congress was his Report on Manufactures. Unlike the earlier reports, this one was not a plea for immediate legislation, but rather a blueprint for the future of the nation as Hamilton saw it. Where Jefferson wanted an agrarian nation that exported raw materials, Hamilton wanted a more complete economy within the United States. He, too, saw farming as the backbone of the economy, but he also wanted to support factories that would create finished goods from the products of the fields, forests, and mines for both domestic consumption and export. In addition, he wanted the nation to make everything its military might need, from uniforms to gunpowder and warships.
Hamilton was a harsh critic of slavery, but although he did not mention slavery in his Report on Manufactures, the document was suffused with what 70 years later a new Republican Party would call “free labor.” Hamilton’s vision promoted open immigration. Immigrants from Europe would work in the emerging factories, Hamilton said, and a plentiful supply of new workers would keep wages low and factories profitable for their owners. He had no fear of child labor either, noting, in general, women and children are rendered more useful, and the latter more early useful, by manufacturing establishments than they would otherwise be.”

Hamilton wanted a federal government that would shape the nation’s economy rather than leave economic development to individuals. He believed that higher tariffs should protect new industries and that government incentives should help launch those ventures when private investment was not sufficient. He saw strong patent protection as essential to invention. Moreover, he wanted to build a network of roads and canals to help commerce flow.
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
These ideas frightened Jefferson and Madison. At one point, Jefferson told Washington that he thought his treasury secretary was expanding the “general welfare” clause of the Constitution to give Congress the authority to regulate every aspect of the nation s economy. Jefferson would continue to worry, especially as Washington sided with his treasury secretary more often than not.
Although Hamilton was a brilliant if sometimes unscrupulous leader, not all of his ideas were his alone. He was regularly looking to Europe, especially Britain, for ideas, and there were many economic ideas ready for export. Hamilton greatly admired the British industrialists who were creating mechanized production on a scale never seen before. He was also influenced by the Scottish philosopher Adam Smith whose book, Wealth of Nations, was published in 1776.
In the economic world that Smith described, wealth was generated, not by the simple ownership of things—land or gold or products—but, rather, by the free trade of goods and services and by competition to expand trade. As people competed to make a profit on their transactions, they increased the circulation of money, lowered the cost of goods, and created general prosperity—the wealth of nations and of individuals. Competition, Smith said, was the key to wealth. Thus he wrote, “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their self-interest.” As that self-interest is satisfied through competition, there is more meat, beer, and bread at lower cost available for everyone while the butcher, brewer, and baker live well. For Smith, who called Britain “a nation of shopkeepers,” it was the shopkeepers and manufacturers and traders, not the hoarders of gold and silver, who made wealth.
73
7.2
73

THINKING HISTORICALLY
Hamilton vs. Jefferson
In his 1791 Report on Manufactures, Alexander Hamilton defended "the expediency of encouraging manufacturers in the United States."Contrast!ng farming with manufacturing, he noted:
labour employed in Agriculture is in a great measure periodical and occasional, depending on seasons, liable to various and long intermissions; while that occupied in many manufactures is constant and regular, extending through the year, embracing in some instances night as well as day.
Hamilton knew that not everyone agreed with him. Some believed that it was wrong to use the government "to accelerate the growth of manufactures." Critics, he knew, liked a world in which, "the less independent condition of an artisan can be exchanged for the more independent condition of a farmer.
Hamilton's critics, led by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, feared an activist government and thought his plans were an antidemocratic effort to strengthen the power of the financial elite and their political allies. Where Hamilton wanted the federal government to foster manufacturing and commerce, Jefferson and
his supporters wanted a passive federal government that stayed out of people's way. While still secretary of state, Jefferson wrote, "Hamilton's financial system.. .had two objects; 1 st, as a puzzle to exclude popular understanding and inquiry, 2nd, as a machine for the corruption of the legislature." Jefferson believed that independent farmers were far more likely to maintain a strong democratic government than paid employees, who, in giving up their economic freedom, would soon also give up their political freedom. He saw Hamilton's plan as a way to confuse the true agents of democracy. This debate from the 1790s is still alive today.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
What regions of the country in the 1790s best reflected Jefferson's view of America? What regions reflected Hamilton's view?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What groups in American society stood to gain the most if Hamilton's vision was enacted? Which groups would gain from Jefferson's vision?
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 187
12
Smith’s book was a direct attack on the earlier ideas of mercantilism that saw wealth as a matter of getting and hoarding wealth. In the new world of a capitalist system or a market economy where commerce and trade were most significant, Great Britain, with its growing factories and its Royal Navy controlling the oceans, was destined to great wealth. As Smith was trying to describe the economic system in Great Britain, Hamilton was trying with surprising success, in spite of the opposition, to duplicate the system in the United States.
13
12
Quick Review How did Hamilton's ideas for the young United States differ from those of Jefferson? How might different groups of Americans line up as supporters of one or the other?
7,4
7.3
SETTING THE PACE: THE WASHINGTON ADMINISTRATION__________________________
Explain the precedents set by George Washington's presidential administration.
While President Washington tended to leave economic policy to his secretary of the treasury, he was far from a passive bystander during his 8 years in office. Although economic issues were the top priority, Washington also faced many others. Having spent most of his adult life in public service, Washington knew how fragile the new republic was. The votes to adopt the new Constitution had been close in several states, and powerful leaders, including Patrick Henry in Virginia and John Hancock in Massachusetts, would have been happy to return to a system in which the states were supreme and the national government only a weak federation. Many rural Americans, including the poor white farmers who made up most of the citizens, distrusted all governments and felt they got little benefit from them while the tax on imports raised the cost of necessities. An obscure Massachusetts farmer, William Manning, who had fought at the battle of Concord, now wrote a pamphlet, The Key of Liberty, in which he argued that “friends to liberty and free government” needed to be watchful of the “few” who were dominating the new administration and needed to be prevented from destroying “free government” and “tyrannizing over” the people. While farmers like Manning complained, Britain was alert, maneuvering in military and diplomatic actions along the borders of the fledgling republic, prepared to reopen hostilities and, indeed, retake the newly independent nation.
Washington was especially worried that the new nation would lose the land west of the 13 original states. Although Britain had ceded all its claims to land east of the Mississippi River to the United States, Indians who lived in that huge territory had not agreed, and when Washington took office, the tribes were considerably stronger than the U.S. Army. In addition, the British had not removed all of their forces from forts in that area, even though they had agreed to at the end of the Revolution. The British saw the Indians as a useful instrument to help them reignite a war that would end American independence and return the country to the empire.
Many western whites were so fed up with the lack of protection by the federal government that there was talk of forming a separate western nation. Between 1785 and 1788, John Sevier led settlers in the western counties of North Carolina—now the	j
state of Tennessee—to form a state they called Franklin, or sometimes, the Republic	’
of Franklin. They were desperate for support in their battles with local Cherokee and Chickasaw. When their petition to become a state failed, they virtually governed themselves as an independent nation. Sensing an opportunity, Spanish authorities offered financial support to the settlers if they would affiliate with Spain rather than the United States, but North Carolina authorities successfully reasserted authority in the region. When he became president in 1789, Washington wanted to be sure there were no similar interests in independence or foreign alliances in the western lands claimed by the United States.
188 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
As one of his first moves after taking office, Washington set out on a series of grand tours of the United States. He meant to see and be seen with the citizens of the country. People loved seeing in person this war hero, now president, and the tours were an important effort to solidify the country behind the president and the constitution. A lifelong soldier, Washington also played a major role in the wars between the United States government and the Native American tribes that dominated the Ohio region when he came to office. In spite of a series of defeats for the U.S. Army, Washington kept pressing his case and eventually defeated the tribes that had long inhabited the Ohio River Valley. When Hamilton’s efforts to raise taxes created an armed uprising of farmers along the Pennsylvania frontier—the so-called Whiskey Rebellion— Washington himself took charge of the army that put down the rebellion but also treated the rebels far more leniently than some like Alexander Hamilton wanted. Finally, in his second term in office, Washington turned most of his attention to foreign policy, specifically the growing tension between revolutionary France and the United States, which continued even after he left office.
The President Tours the Nation
To use his personal prestige to consolidate public support for the new government, Washington went on tours of the nation, not an easy task at a time when roads were poor and horses and carriages were the only means of transport once one left the waterways.
American Voices
Moses Seixas and George Washington, 1790 Letters
fn 1790, as part of one of his national tours, Washington visited Newport, Rhode Island, and its Touro Synagogue, the oldest synagogue in the United States. Moses Seixas, speaking for the congregation, wrote to Washington, thanking him for the visit. Washington responded with a statement of his commitment to religious freedom. In a nation that was still sorting out the meaning of democracy, and at a time before the First Amendment was added to the Constitution, Washington's letter was an important statement of American freedom.
Letter from Moses Seixas
Permit the children of the stock of Abraham to approach you with the most cordial affection and esteem for your person and merits—and to join with our fellow citizens in welcoming you to Newport....Deprived as we heretofore have been of the invaluable rights of free Citizens, we now with a deep sense of gratitude to the Almighty disposer of all events behold a Government, erected by the Majesty of the People a Government, which to bigotry gives no sanction, to persecution no assistance but generously affording to al, Liberty of conscience, and immunities of Citizenship: deeming every one, of whatever Nation, tongue, or language equal parts of the great governmental Machine....
Letter from G. Washington to the Hebrew
Congregation in Newport Rhode Island
While I receive, with much satisfaction, your Address replete with expressions of affection and esteem, I rejoice in the
opportunity of assuring you, that I shall always retain a grateful remembrance of the cordial welcome I experienced in my visit to Newport....The Citizens of the United States of America have a right to applaud themselves for having given to mankind examples of an enlarged and liberal policy: a policy worthy of imitation. All possess alike liberty of conscience and immunities of citizenship. It is now no more that toleration is spoken of, as if it was by the indulgence of one class of people, that another enjoyed the exercise of their inherent natural rights. For happily the Government of the United States, which gives to bigotry no sanction, to persecution no assistance, requires only that they who live under its protection should demean themselves as good citizens, in giving it on all occasions their effectual support.
Source: George Washington Papers, 1741 -1799, Library of Congress, Letterbook 39.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What claims do Seixas and Washington make about religious toleration in the United States of the 1790s?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Washington wrote his letter before the First Amendment was added to the Constitution. What does he mean by "more than toleration" and "natural rights" to "free religious expression"?
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 189
7,1 !
7.2
13
The battles between the U.S. military and a confederation of tribes that were fought between 1785 and 1795 were sometimes referred to as
the Northwest Indian War, or Little Turtle's War, in recognition of the central role of the Miami leader, Little Turtle, in the early defeats of the U.S. forces.
Nevertheless, between 1789 and 1791, he rode by carriage and horseback from New York through much of New England and across the South. The trip allowed him to address important issues such as religious freedom, hear from citizens, and personalize a distant national government. Welcoming the nations greatest hero and leader was the social event of the season for these small-town residents, and for many it consolidated the sense of belonging to one nation. Privately, Washington sometimes complained about the accommodations, but he was convinced that his speeches and meetings had done much to build good will and support for the nation and his administration. Indian Wars: Building the U.S. Army
Washington was deeply concerned about how to handle the frontier Indian tribes. He blamed much of the problem on the “turbulence and disorderly conduct” of settlers who would not wait for permission or protection to enter the new territories but then who complained bitterly when Indians attacked them. Still, he needed to act with caution because he wanted these new settlers to be loyal citizens despite his frustration with them. On a personal level, he himself, like many members of Congress, had speculated in western lands and stood to make money if the land could actually be opened to white settlement. But given the poverty of the federal government-including only 600 soldiers in the army when Washington became president—the president hardly commanded a force that could make much of a difference in the vast western territory.
Ihe chief representative of the U.S. government on the western frontier, Arthur St. Clair, was both the appointed governor of what were then the Northwest Territories of the United States—lands Indians claimed—and a major general in the army. Congress had ordered him to end all Indian titles to the lands between the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers. But St. Clair lacked the resources to do his job. His strategy, as he wrote to Washington, was to divide and conquer—to seek many treaties with individual tribes rather than one overall treaty with all the tribes. But this strategy did not go well. In 1789, just before Washington’s inauguration, St. Clair negotiated several treaties with one group of Indian leaders at Fort Harmar, but most other leaders and most tribes rejected these treaties, making them virtually useless.
In 1790, Washington asked Congress to expand the army so it could force the tribes of the Ohio region to “sue for peace before a blow is struck at them.” Congress agreed to expand the army to 1,000 men and added 1,500 state militia from Kentucky, Virginia, and Pennsylvania. This increased force, however, was still not strong enough to win the victories the president thought essential.
In September 1790, 1,450 troops under General Josiah Harmar marched into the territory of the Miami and Shawnee to destroy villages and crops as a show of force that might stop the attacks on frontier settlements. In October, Harmar’s army was attacked by Shawnees, Miamis, and Pottawattamies, and 500 of the Americans were killed before the rest retreated. After this defeat, attacks on white settlements continued, and attempts at negotiating peace failed. Although some Indians, led by a Seneca named Cornplanter, sought to make a separate peace for their tribes, most others rejected the government’s proposed treaties.
In 1791, President Washington ordered a new attack. General St. Clair himself led 2,000 troops in a direct assault on the Miamis on the Wabash River in what is now Indiana. On November 4, 1791, 1,500 Indians from several tribes led by Mishikinakwa—or Little Turtle—of the Miami and Blue Jacket of the Shawnee killed over 500 troops and most of the expedition’s female camp followers. Washington was shocked that St. Clair had allowed his army “to be cut to pieces, hacked, butchered, tomahawked,” and relieved St. Clair of his command. As 1792 began, most of the area the United States called its Northwest Territory was in Indian hands.
190 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Throughout 1792, the Washington administration and many of the Indians tried to negotiate. In June 1792, Joseph Brant, the Mohawk leader who had earlier traveled to London to meet with King George III, went to Philadelphia and met with President Washington, becoming one of the few people to meet with both national leaders. The meeting with Washington was cordial but did not lead to any final agreements, and Brant continued to strengthen his ties with Britain. Brant and most of the Iroquois, Shawnee, and Miami leaders were determined to allow no white settlement west of the Ohio River and demanded that the United States abandon its forts in that territory. But white settlers continued to move across the Ohio River. They and their government wanted more land. Some of the negotiations were good faith efforts. Some were a sham. All failed.
While some in Congress and the press argued for peace and an end to the waste of money and lives in western military campaigns, Washington called for a full-scale war on the Indians. Secretary of War Knox began to create a truly professional army of 5,000 men. In late 1793, he launched a third military campaign in the Northwest Territory.
In place of the disgraced St. Clair, Washington appointed Anthony Wayne (known as “Mad” Anthony Wayne) as major general of the U.S. Army. Wayne trained his army, and during the winter of 1793-1794, they built a new base, Fort Recovery, on the site of St. Clair’s defeat. In August 1794, Wayne’s army defeated a large Indian force led by the Shawnee Blue Jacket at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, near present-day Toledo, Ohio. After fierce fighting among twisted tree limbs and trunks, the Indians broke ranks and retreated. British forces at the nearby Fort Miami did not support their Indian allies, and Wayne decided not to attack the British fort (see Map 7-1).
A year later, the Treaty of Greenville ended major hostilities between Indians and whites in the future states of Ohio and Indiana. The treaty established Indian reserves
Treaty of Greenville
A treaty agreed to in 1795 in which Native Americans in the Northwest Territory were forced to cede most of the present states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin to the United States.

nt


BRITISH NORTH AMERICA
7.1
7.2
73
X4
X?
o
zliiO"
NEW
HAMPSHIRE
MASSACHUSET7
VERMONT
* Fort
,EfZ Oswegatchie
5	W 3
we9°
’ MEWYORK'
\	- <aultSte.Marie^
Fort Michiliimackinac ■	1	,
Illinois
Fwm«E8$G0$ ’> Hamar's 1 rt DetrP’* SAUK5AND \ Fort •	‘
foxes Dearbpirn, 7572*
PQWTAyVATOMIS
kickapoos ‘Territory	OHIO
ILLINOIS •;	:
touts''"' • '-SHAWNEES ,	KENTUCKY
QUAPAWS *	\ "TENNESS
(CR1PPEWAS
PENNSYLVANIA 'WYANDOTS
St. Clair's DELAWARES ~	' 1791	!	'
Sil
"RHODE
ISLAND CONNECTICUT > ’ NEW JERSEY
SOWiis-iS
DELAWARE
AMk MARYLAND
vt
SPANISH
TERRITORY
VI^IJIHA.^
NORTH CAROJ,!NA“
3 33Sfs-/Is-'-ZZ	3 ;3
Mississippi^
1 chickasaws Territoryf	(
Horseshoe Bend,**
J 1814 CREEKS'
- GEORGIA ; -
CHOCTAWS*	s.
\SFANI

SOUTH
CAROLINA
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
SPANISH
FLORIDA
SEMINOLES
y> Gulf of Mexico
| j Ceded before 1784	* Battle
| '—| Ceded 1784-1809	■ British fort
] Unceded Indian lands, 1809	■ American fort

MAP 7-1 Indian Removals and Resistance,
1790-1814. Between the end of the Revolution in 1783 and the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, there was almost constant warfare between Native American tribes and the U.S. Army in the Northwest Territory and further battles well into the 1800s elsewhere in what was then the West of the country.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 191
After a series of Native American victories, the U.S. Army's victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794
brought organized resistance to an end. A year later, in 1795, defeated tribal leaders agreed to the Treaty of Greenville, ceding most of the land of the Northwest to white settlement. This picture shows Little Turtle talking with General Anthony Wayne.
while ceding most of the remaining lands to white settlers. For the tribes of the Northwest, the Battle of Fallen Timbers and the Treaty of Greenville were the end of their control of the territory. The defeated Indian leader Little Turtle was blunt, telling General Anthony Wayne, “You have pointed out to us the boundary line between the Indians and the United States, but I now take the liberty to inform you, that the line cuts off from the Indians a large portion of the country, which has been enjoyed by my forefathers from time immemorial, without molestation or dispute.” But after Fallen Timbers there was little that the tribal leaders could do. Many Indians moved to British Canada or further west into the Louisiana Territory, still formally controlled by Spain. Although groups of Indians and settlers continued minor skirmishes for another 20 years, 1795 was the end of the Indian Wars in the Ohio region. Efforts to survey settlements and create local governments came quickly.
Washington’s goals for the Northwest Territory and for dealing with the Indians were mostly accomplished. White settlers got the lands they wanted, the British lost their most powerful ally in the region, and the power and prestige of the U.S. Army were enhanced. Settlement continued long after Washington left office, and Ohio was admitted as a state in 1803. Indiana followed in 1816, Illinois in 1818, but Michigan and Wisconsin much later in 1837 and 1848, respectively.
Whiskey Tax, Whiskey Rebellion
When a compromise by Hamilton, fefferson, and Madison led Congress to pass Hamiltons economic plan in 1782, it solved one set of problems but created new ones. Paying off the debt required more income for the federal government than the customs tax alone could raise. After considering several options, Hamilton hit on the idea of taxing whiskey. If there were to be new taxes, a tax on whiskey seemed less undesirable than most options. Even Hamiltons long-time opponent James Madison supported it as a way to increase “sobriety and thereby prevent disease and untimely deaths.” Like the “sin taxes” of later generations, the tax on whiskey seemed an easy call. However, what seemed easy in New York and Philadelphia was seen by farmers in western Pennsylvania as a direct attack on their livelihood.
Western Pennsylvania and neighboring parts of Appalachia had been settled long before the Revolution, primarily by Scots-Irish Presbyterians who were willing to
192 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
fight Indians for land and who wanted to maintain their culture, including their love for whiskey. Turning corn, their staple crop, into whiskey was also the best way to get the crop to market. A farmer could distill corn into whiskey at home and then transport a keg, or several kegs, on a horse or mule over the mountains and sell the liquid corn at $16 a keg in East Coast markets, making a considerable profit. It was much easier and more profitable than trying to transport raw corn over the mountains, and between 1783 and 1795 when Spain closed the port of New Orleans to American goods, transporting any products down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers was not an option.
Hamilton’s tax, however, ate up the profit. Since the tax was applied uniformly to all producers, small producers of whiskey ended up paying a higher percentage of their income than did those producing larger amounts. Moreover, the tax singled out these whiskey-making farmers and not others such as land speculators (of which Washington was one). Western farmers complained that the tax discriminated against them, and it did. They were already angry. Most frontier farmers had opposed adopting the Constitution when it was being debated in 1787 and 1788. Now only a few years later, the first administration elected under that document wanted to destroy their best hope of economic prosperity. They rebelled.
The Whiskey Rebellion began with modest protests. The Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Maryland, Virginia, and Georgia legislatures passed resolutions opposing the tax. When these actions were not heeded by the administration, protests escalated quickly. Tax collectors were shot at, tarred and feathered, or beaten and threatened with scalping. In a mass meeting in Pittsburgh, rebels agreed to fight for the repeal of the tax and to treat tax collectors with the “contempt they deserve.” In 1793 and 1794, no federal taxes were collected in Kentucky or Pennsylvania’s western counties. A convention of more than 200 farmers at Parkinson’s Ferry debated armed resistance to the national government. In 1794, a federal marshal, David Lennox, and John Neville, a friend of Washington’s from the Revolution, were attacked by armed men when they tried to collect the tax. Neville’s house was burned, and he and his family barely escaped. On August 1, 6,000 rebels met outside of Pittsburgh and, modeling their behavior on revolutionaries in France, created a Committee of Public Safety, erected a guillotine, and made plans to attack the government garrison at Pittsburgh to gain weapons.
Hamilton advised Washington to “exert the full force of the Law against Offenders.” But Washington worried about losing the westerners’ allegiance to the United States. Throughout 1792 and 1793, he sought to negotiate with the whiskey makers. Washington’s overtures were seen as weakness by some of the Whiskey Rebels. Farmers who paid the tax were attacked and their stills destroyed.
Whiskey Rebellion
Armed uprising in 1794 by farmers in western Pennsylvania who attempted to prevent the collection of the excise tax on whiskey.
Western farmers who opposed the whiskey tax turned to increasingly violent means of resistance, including tarring and feathering U.S. tax agents as others had done to British tax agents before the Revolution.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 193
7.3

By the summer of 1794, as the riots spread and after the attack on Neville, Washington had had enough. He saw the attacks on federal officials and the refusal to pay the taxes as part of a plot to overthrow the Constitution. He decided to act.
Given the size of the insurgency, Washington called for 12,000 troops to be drawn from the militias of New Jersey, Maryland, and Virginia. The president himself took command of the force and, with Hamilton at his side, marched across Pennsylvania. While Hamilton promised that every rebel they caught would be “skewered, shot, or hanged on the first tree,” Washington remained “grave, distant, and austere.”
In the end, the sheer size of Washington’s army frightened the rebels and ended the rebellion. Most of the rebel farmers either accepted Washington’s offer of amnesty if they would swear loyalty to the United States or melted away into the woods and hollows. The army arrested 150 rebel leaders, but only two were convicted of treason, and Washington pardoned both of them. But the back of the rebellion had been broken. Federal authority—loved by some, hated by others—was supreme.
The French Revolution Comes to America
News and ideas moved slowly in the 1700s. People had to wait weeks to hear about ! developments in another state and months to hear about foreign events. Yet to a surprising degree, Americans in the 1790s were well informed about and influenced by developments in Europe, most of all by the French Revolution about which most Americans had strong opinions.
If much of Washington’s first term was taken up with economic matters and Indian wars, his second term (1793-1797) was dominated by the French Revolution (Table 7-1). Indeed, if revolution had not erupted in France, Washington might have served only one term and retired as he wanted to do.
TABLE 7-1 Interplay of the French Revolution and the United States, 1789-1801
Developments in the United States
Developments In France
April 1789—George Washington is inaugurated as the first U.S. president; Washington appoints Alexander Hamilton (generally pro-British) Secretary of the Treasury and Thomas Jefferson (generally pro-French) Secretary of State.
September 1789—Congress approves the Bill of Rights, including freedom of religion and the press and guaranteed due process. (Ratified December, 1791)
July 1789—A Paris mob storms the Bastille Prison and sets prisoners free (keys to the Bastille are eventually given to George Washington).
November 1792—George Washington is elected to a second term as president after agreeing to be a candidate primarily because of concerns with the French Revolution.
April 1793—Citizen Genet arrives as French ambassador.
1793-1794—Democratic-Republican Societies spring up around United States in support of French Revolution and Jefferson-Madison policies at home; during the Whiskey Rebellion, farmers create a “Committee of Public Safety," modeled on France, and set up a guillotine.
1797—	John Quincy Adams reports a French plot to create a breakaway republic in southwest United States, President Adams fears a French-Jeffersonian plot to create a Directory in the United States.
1798-	1800—XYZ Affair; United States fights undeclared naval war with France.
1801—Thomas Jefferson is elected president, reducing tensions with France.
1803—Jefferson purchases Louisiana Territory from France.
August 1789—The French National Assembly issues the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen—"Men are born and remain free and equal"—and affirms freedom of thought, religion, petition, and due process.
September 1791—A New French Constitution creates a constitutional monarchy.
April 1792—The National Assembly declares war on Austria, beginning 23 years of war in Europe; French monarchy is overthrown.
January 1793—Louis XVI is executed in Paris.
June 1793-June 1794—Reign of Terror, under a "Committee of Public Safety,"over 40,000 people are executed; the terror ends with the execution of Maximilian Robespierre.
1795-1799—France is governed by a five-member Directory.
1799—Napoleon Bonaparte stages a coup d'etat and rules France until 1814.
194 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
By 1792, Washington believed that he had stabilized the country and would have been happy to retire. However, both Hamilton and Jefferson, by then bitter enemies, told Washington that the country still needed him, in part because each saw Washington as a buffer against the other’s policies. Most of their followers agreed. The most powerful argument for a second term, however, was Washington’s realization that revolutionary France would soon be at war with Austria and Britain, and that war would make American diplomacy much more difficult. He could not walk away from what he saw as a coming foreign policy crisis even as he insisted “at my age, the love of retirement grows every day more & more powerful.” His personal popularity exceeded any disagreement with his policies, and he was reelected unanimously.
When word of the European war reached Philadelphia in the spring of 1792, the Washington administration issued a formal Proclamation of Neutrality. Where Washington had seemed to favor Hamilton in economic matters, he favored Jefferson—and Jefferson’s successor Edmund Randolph—on foreign policy. When France’s revolutionary government asked for America to pay off debt from the Revolutionary War earlier than negotiated, Washington agreed. When the French announced plans to send a new ambassador, just after the execution of King Louis XVI in January 1793, Washington agreed to receive him. Washington was determined to maintain neutrality. He would not let Hamilton’s pro-British views draw him into a war, much as he disliked some of the news from France.
However, the new French ambassador, Edmond-Charles Genet—Citizen Genet as he was called, using the title that every person in France adopted if they wanted to keep their head—was as undiplomatic as a diplomat could be. He landed in Charleston, South Carolina, and immediately began commissioning American vessels to attack British shipping in direct violation of Washington’s neutrality policies. He also purchased munitions for France and enlisted volunteers to attack Spanish Florida. Then he went to Philadelphia to meet the president.
Washington had long mastered the art of showing icy displeasure. Having heard about Genet’s actions in Charleston, he met Genet with great formality, standing under a picture of Louis XVI, America’s ally during its Revolution, whom Genet’s government had just executed. In the nation’s capital of Philadelphia, Genet continued to raise arms for privateers to attack the British and recruit soldiers from Kentucky to attack Florida. Washington then demanded that the French government recall Genet, which it did early in 1794. (Fearing execution if he returned to France, Genet then asked for asylum and settled in New York as a private citizen.) But in Genet’s brief tenure as ambassador, the Citizen Genet Affair, as it came to be called, did lasting harm, inspiring hostility toward France among President Washington, Vice President John Adams, and other officials, while arousing more enthusiasm for the French Revolution among some Americans.
While Washington found it easy to dismiss Citizen Genet, he could not as easily dismiss Americans’ support for the French Revolution. In the first years of the revolution in France, most Americans strongly supported developments in the country’s oldest ally. When French citizens stormed the Bastille prison in July 1789, Lafayette, who had fought with Washington during the Revolution, sent the keys to the former prison to the president. Conservative Federalists joined with staunch Antifederalists in celebrating the emergence of a new constitutional state in Europe.
Some Federalists soon began to have doubts about the French Revolution, however. For those who worried that deference and hierarchy were disappearing all too fast in the United States, news of riots and killings in France were terrifying. For the emerging republican movement, however, the news from France was most encouraging. Thomas Jefferson never stopped believing that the revolution was a grand moment in history, even if he was uncomfortable with what he viewed as its excesses. Once Britain joined the war against revolutionary France, many Americans sided with France despite official neutrality.
7.3
Citizen Genet Affair
The efforts of Edmond-Charles Genet, French ambassador to the U.S. (1793-1794), to stir up military support for France and the French Revolution among Americans, leading to long-term anti-French sentiment.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 195

Democratic-Republican Societies supporting the French Revolution sprang up across the United States. The first society was established in Philadelphia, but before long there were dozens, from Maine to South Carolina and from coastal cities to backcountry hamlets. These grassroots societies were more radical than anything even Jefferson was comfortable with. Some of those who joined the Democratic-Republican Societies were farmers who were angry with the federal government and ready for some revolutionary activity of their own. But the largest societies were in East Coast cities, where anti-British sentiment still ran deep. There, small-time merchants and manufacturers, mechanics, and other citizens were angry at the arrogance of an older, Federalist aristocracy and anxious to make their own place in the new nation. Members of these societies had great hopes for the ideals—if not all the tactics and the bloodshed—of the French Revolution and wanted to defend it. Not accidentally, most of the members of these societies also disliked Hamilton’s economic policies as well as the expanding power of the federal government and supported the Jeffersonian opposition in elections, even if the Democratic-Republican leaders in Congress kept their distance from them.
Regardless of differences, the president was generally considered above politics, so dissenters usually avoided direct criticisms of Washington himself. Even so, the Democratic-Republican Societies became bastions of hostility to many of his policies and closest allies. If the birth of the two-party system can be traced to the split between Hamilton and Jefferson over economic issues, then the deep divides over the revolution in France solidified the organization of the Federalists and the Democratic-Republican Societies and inspired the creation of the Democratic-Republican Party in the United States (see Table 7-2). The Federalists were pro-British and wanted a strong federal government and army as well as economic policies that supported commercial development. The Democratic-Republicans were pro-French and wanted a small federal government, more independence for the states and individuals, less commercial development, and more focus on independent farmers. Ironically, given all the republican talk of liberty and equality, the groups associated with Jefferson were also much more sympathetic to slavery. Many among the Democratic-Republicans saw states’ rights as a vehicle for protecting slavery. By contrast, the Federalists tended to see slavery as morally wrong and harmful to the nation’s commercial development.
Washington, who hated the very idea of permanent factions or parties, tried hard to stay “above the fray” and unite the factions. For a time he succeeded, which explains part of the reason he was unanimously reelected in 1792, but by the end of
TABLE 7-2 Characteristics of the Emerging Political Parties or Factions
Topic
Federalists
Antifederalists or Democratic-Republicans
Leaders
Foreign policy
Influence of federal government Economic policy
Regional base
On slavery
Alien and Sedition Acts (see "The Birth of Political Parties" later in this chapter)
Alexander Hamilton and John Adams (personal enemies)
Generally pro-British; want to model United
States on British institutions
Strong federal government with strong army
Commercial nation; favor building roads and canals and support the Bank of the United States
Strongest in New England Mildly against slavery
Sponsor and enforce Alien and Sedition Acts
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison (personal friends)
Strongly pro-French; generally supportive of the French Revolution
I
Weak federal government; strong states' rights | Agrarian nation; oppose federal spending I for roads and canals and oppose Bank of the ! United States
j Strongest in the southern states
j Favor protecting states' rights as a vehicle to ■ protect slavery
| Sponsor Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions | declaring Alien and Sedition Acts "nullified"
J 96 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
his second term in office in 1797 more people were coming to see him as another Federalist leader. If he had run for a third term—something he had no intention of doing—the election would certainly not have been unanimous, though it is difficult to imagine a person of his enormous popularity being defeated.
U.S. anger at Britain was not fueled only by memories of 1776. In the 1790s, British soldiers still held Fort Detroit and Fort Niagara (near present-day Buffalo) in violation of the Treaty of Paris. In the summer of 1793, fearing that American neutrality was a cover for selling American grain to all sides in the European war, the British government issued Orders in Council (orders from the King through his Privy Council— the equivalent of Executive Orders in the United States) that banned all American commercial links with France or the French Caribbean islands. By 1794, the Royal Navy had taken 400 merchant sailors prisoner. Farmers could not sell their wheat, and dockworkers had no jobs. There were growing calls for war with Britain, which might help France, rid the frontier of the British, and end the restrictions on shipping. Washington, however, was determined to avoid war. He sent Chief Justice John Jay, who had been foreign secretary under the Articles of Confederation, to London to resolve the problems. For a short moment, Jay’s appointment as U.S. representative to London quieted the calls for war.
But the treaty Jay negotiated with Britain late in 1794 accomplished little of what Washington wanted. Britain did agree to pay compensation for its attacks on shipping since 1793, but not to end the ban on neutral shipping to France or to pay compensation for earlier American losses. While Britain also promised again to remove its troops from the Mississippi Valley, it had been ignoring its own promises to do so for a decade, and there was little reason to assume that it would now change policy. The most Jay could say of the treaty he had negotiated was “It breaks the ice.” Washington was bitterly disappointed that Jay had not accomplished more but sent Jay’s Treaty to the Senate for ratification anyway. The Senate vote in 1795 showed the growing divisions in the country. All 20 Senators identified with the Federalists in the Senate voted for the treaty, and all 10 associated with the Democratic-Republicans voted against it. The public attacks against Washington, which had been muted up to this point—in part because of his personal popularity and in part because many believed the president should be above attack—now became much louder.
In the final year of the Washington administration, one significant diplomatic victory helped to balance out the previous controversies. While Jay had been in London, Washington had sent Thomas Pinckney to Madrid. Where Jay had failed, Pinckney’s Treaty succeeded beyond expectations. Worrying that Britain and the United States might settle their differences at Spain’s expense, the Spanish agreed to a treaty that pushed the northern border of Florida farther south and westward to the Mississippi and, far more important, opened the Mississippi River and the port of New Orleans to U.S. commerce. Access to New Orleans was very important. During the colonial era Spain had allowed travel on the Mississippi River but, fearing the rising power of the new United States, had closed the port to all American citizens after the Revolution. With Pinckney’s Treaty, western farmers could again ship goods down the Mississippi through New Orleans to world markets instead of having to struggle across the Appalachians. In addition, for all the uproar over Jay’s Treaty, the British actually honored it, removing their soldiers from Niagara and Detroit. Washington believed he could now retire in confidence that the nation was secure.
7.3
Jay's Treaty
A treaty with Britain, negotiated in 1794, in which the United States made major concessions to avert a war over the British seizure of American ships.
Pinckney's Treaty
A treaty with Spain that set the border between the United States and Spanish Florida.
Quick Review How did the Washington Administration try to strengthen the nation’s security between 1789 and 1796?
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 197
7.4
THE BIRTH OF POLITICAL PARTIES: ADAMS AND JEFFERSON
Explain the growing split between the Federalist and Democratic-Republican parties, including how the French Revolution and the personal differences among Hamilton, Adams, and Jefferson affected American politics.
The framers of the Constitution feared the idea of political parties and the idea of people voting for specific candidates in a national election for president. Because of these fears, they designed the election of the president to be a complex process in which each state would have the number of presidential electors equal to its representation in Congress. These electors would form the Electoral College. State legislatures could select these electors any way they wished. The plan did not entail candidates being nominated for the presidency. Each elector would get two votes, technically one for president and one for vice president, but electors would not differentiate the offices on their ballots. Instead, each elector would vote for whomever he wished as long as his two candidates were from different states. Whoever got the most votes from all the electors would be president. The runner up would be vice president. If no one got a majority of the electoral votes, then the election would be resolved in the House of Representatives where each state delegation would have one vote in selecting among the top three vote getters in the electoral college. No one knew how this complex system would work, but the avoidance of nominations or indeed the identification of actual candidates before the selection of presidential electors was an attempt to prevent the influence of specific factions. Since there had been a national consensus that George Washington should be the first president and since he was reelected unanimously, only Washington’s retirement tested the system. The first two tests, in 1796 and 1800, did not go well.
John Adams's Difficult Presidency
The election in 1796 that made John Adams president was an odd one. By 1796, Adams, though never a close friend or political ally of Hamilton, had come to represent the Federalists, those who supported the Washington administration’s foreign policy and most of Hamilton’s economic policies. Most Federalists also supported Thomas Pinckney of South Carolina for vice president and a few, including Hamilton, tried to maneuver Pinckney into the presidency.
Thomas Jefferson was the logical candidate of the Democratic-Republicans, that large group—though not yet an organized political party—who sympathized with the French Revolution and thought Hamilton had shifted too much power to the federal government and to the urban economic elites of New York and Philadelphia. Although Aaron Burr of New York was not an official running mate, many Democratic-Republicans supported him as their vice presidential candidate. Advocates of these views had formed Democratic-Republican Societies in all parts of the country, organized their own newspapers, sympathized with the Whiskey Rebels, and adopted the French tricolor of red, white, and blue as their political colors. They were ready to become a political force in presidential politics.
Adams and Jefferson remained at home throughout 1796—actually wanting to be president after Washington was considered unseemly—but many others campaigned for them. A Democratic-Republican paper in Philadelphia called Adams His Rotundity (he was heavy) and said that he was the “champion of kings, ranks, and titles.” Federalist papers said that Jefferson was an atheist, a friend of the radical French Revolutionaries, and a danger to democracy. There were also battles within the factions. After Adams learned of Hamilton s efforts to make Pinckney president instead of him, he called Hamilton “as great a hypocrite as any in the U.S.”
George Washington also entered the campaign, though without formally endorsing a candidate. In September 1796, Washington gave what he called his farewell address 6 months before he left office. Later generations saw the speech as the grand nonpartisan benediction of the nation s founder. Contemporaries understood
198 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
it differently. In the address, Washington said he wanted to warn his country “against the baneful effects of the spirit of party generally.” A political party would “distract the public councils and enfeeble the public administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms.” He also warned “that foreign influence is one of the most baneful foes of republican government.”
In 1796, most people took the speech to mean “vote for Adams not Jefferson.” In Washington s mind, the Democratic-Republican Societies embodied “the spirit of party generally, and he had seen how they could foment “riot and insurrection” when he had led the army against the Whiskey Rebels. He also feared that Jefferson’s pro-French views represented the “insidious wiles of foreign influence.” Although he would never say so directly, Washington wanted his vice president to be his successor. He got his wish.
Of the 139 electoral votes cast in the 1796 election, Adams received 71, all from New England, New York, and New Jersey, while Jefferson received 68, all from Pennsylvania and the southern states. So Adams and Jefferson, these two long-time political rivals, became president and vice president, respectively.
The anger of the 1796 campaign cooled quickly. The pro-Jefferson newspaper, the Aurora, declared that Adams was a man “possessing great integrity.” One of Jefferson’s strongest supporters in Congress, William Branch Giles of Virginia, said, “The old man will make a good President, too.” Jefferson and Adams exchanged cordial letters, and Adams invited the vice president to sit in the Cabinet—which Washington had never done for him—but Jefferson declined. The two dined with Washington just after Adams’s inauguration, and in his inaugural address, Adams insisted that it was his “inflexible determination” to maintain peace with all nations, including France, words that surely reassured Jefferson and his followers.
But the split between the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans went too deep for soothing words to heal. Differences came to a head in Congress in January 1798 when Matthew Lyon, a Democratic-Republican from Vermont, ridiculed the ceremonial greeting for President Adams and insulted Federalist Roger Griswold of Connecticut. Griswold then insulted Lyon who spat in Griswold’s face. Griswold attacked Lyon with his cane, and Lyon grabbed a pair of fireplace tongs to fight back on the floor of the House of Representatives. The two were pulled apart, but the incident symbolized the hatred between the two parties and the depths to which public discourse had sunk.
Nothing, however, represented the split between the two factions as much as their attitudes toward the French Revolution. Barely a week after his inauguration, Adams received troubling news that the French Directory, the five-member council then ruling revolutionary France, had refused to receive Adams’s choice as U.S. ambassador to France. Adams had actually chosen Charles Cotesworth Pinckney (brother of the Federalist candidate for vice president) to improve the U.S.-French
relationship, but the French did not see it that way. The Directory also launched an undeclared war on U.S. shipping. In the following months, the French captured 300 American merchant ships. From his son, John Quincy Adams, who was serving as U.S. Ambassador to Prussia, Adams also heard of a French plan to stir up revolt and secession in the western U.S. territories. The Federalist press called for war against France while the Democratic-Republicans claimed it was a false crisis made up by the pro-British Federalists.
Adams, who was more nonpartisan than his Federalist backers had hoped, sought a middle ground. He sent Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts and John Marshall of Virginia to join Pinckney in Paris and try to reopen negotiations. But he also asked Congress to establish a navy and provide funds to prepare for war if it came. The response to the new president’s actions broke along partisan lines, with Federalists supporting Adams and Democratic-Republicans opposing him. But Adams won authorization for a new Department of the Navy and funds to build and support three medium-sized warships called frigates.

7.4
In this popular drawing that was widely circulated, Roger Griswold, a Connecticut Federalist, attacked Matthew Lyon, a Vermont Republican, who fought back with fire tongs. Few images so starkly described the state of partisan politics in the new nation.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 199
XYZ
Affair Diplomatic incident in 1798 in which Americans were outraged by the demand of the French for a bribe as a condition for negotiating with American diplomats.
Quasi-War
An undeclared war—1797 to 1800— between the United States and France.
Alien and Sedition Acts
A series of three acts passed by Congress in 1798 that made it harder for new immigrants to vote and made it a crime to criticize the president or Congress.
This cartoon reflects the anti-French sentiment of many Americans, showing France as having five heads (for the five-member Directory that ruled at one point), the bloody guillotine in the background, and the demand for a bribe from the upright American delegates. Note also the Africans representative of French-owned Haiti.
However, Adams’s peace overtures to the French did not go well. When his new delegation arrived in Paris, the French foreign minister Charles Maurice de Talleyrand arranged for agents, whom Adams identified only as “X, Y, and Z,” to inform the Americans that negotiations could proceed only if Talleyrand was paid a bribe of $250,000 and the French government received a loan of $10 to $12 million as well as an apology for what the French considered Adams’s belligerent tone. Pinckney’s famous response was “No, no, not a sixpence.” In fact, the commissioners were prepared to pay a bribe, not an unusual part of diplomacy at the time, but the amount demanded was far too high.
When word of the so-called “XYZ Affair” reached Congress and the American public in March 1798, Adams’s popularity soared, and many called for a war against France to avenge U.S. honor. Federalists in Congress voted to increase the size of the U.S. Army and shift its focus from the western frontier to a presumed threat of French invasion on the Atlantic coast. Given British naval supremacy, a French invasion was improbable. Even if the British did not like the United States, they certainly did not want their archenemy France to control any territory in North America. Adams, unlike most Federalists, feared a large standing U.S. Army, especially after Hamilton won appointment as a major general within it. Adams preferred to strengthen the Navy to protect U.S. interests.
In 1798 and 1799, though there was no formal declaration of war, the United States engaged in what became known as the Quasi-War with France or, as Adams preferred to call it, the “Half-War.” Treaties with France dating back to the American Revolution were repealed, and the United States began a trade embargo against France. The United States also supported the independence of Haiti, something it had not done during the Washington administration. Congress created the Marine Corps along with the Navy and armed merchant ships so they could attack French ships near the U.S. coast or in the Caribbean. Even if France had the most powerful army in Europe, Talleyrand did not really want war with the United States, and he began to make peace overtures. U.S. neutrality, if not friendship, would be important, • Talleyrand thought, if France were to launch a planned invasion of England.
The war hysteria also led Congress to pass the Alien and Sedition Acts, actually three separate acts, that irreparably hurt Adams’s reputation even though he did not directly request any of them. Federalists had become increasingly fearful of pro-French agitation. Massachusetts Congressman Harrison Gray Otis asked, “Do we not know that the French nation have organized bands of aliens as well as their own citizens, in other countries?” Many Federalists wondered, could it not happen here?
i
200 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
To make sure that French efforts, aided by Jeffersonian Democratic-Republicans, could not undermine the government and its Federalist leaders, Congress passed the Naturalization Act and the Alien Friends Act in June 1798, which were referred to as the Alien Acts. These laws lengthened the time to qualify for citizenship from 5 to 14 years—to ensure that recent pro-French immigrants could not vote—and allowed the government to deport anyone deemed dangerous to the United States. While no one was actually deported under the acts, many French citizens left the United States on their own rather than wait and see what might happen.
A month later, on July 14,1798, Congress passed the Sedition Act by a slim majority, and Adams signed the law. The Sedition Act targeted primarily newspaper editors like Benjamin Franklin Bache, editor of the Democratic-Republican Aurora, making any “false, scandalous, and malicious” speech against the government, particularly Congress or the president, a crime. Unlike the Alien Acts, the Sedition Act was vigorously enforced. Democratic-Republican Congressman Matthew Lyon—who earlier had the wrestling match with Griswold—was convicted under the law for continuing to criticize the Adams administration and spent 4 months in a Vermont jail. (His constituents made it clear what they thought of the act when they overwhelmingly reelected Lyon to Congress once he was released from jail.) All told, 17 people were tried under the act, including a drunk in New Jersey who had “cast aspersions on the President’s posterior” and was fined the then enormous sum of $150. But newspapers were not silenced, and the attack on free speech undermined support for the Federalists.
The Democratic-Republicans attacked the Alien and Sedition Acts. Vice President Jefferson initially counseled “patience with what he saw as “the reign of the witches” in the Adams administration, but soon came to view the Alien and Sedition laws as a fundamental threat to democracy. In the fall of 1798, he drafted resolutions, and his friends and supporters in the Kentucky legislature adopted his words, that asserted a state’s right to declare federal law “void and of no force” within the state’s jurisdiction. Virginia’s legislature adopted similar resolutions drafted by James Madison. Both legislatures invited other states to join them, but none did. Nevertheless, the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions drew a sharp line between the two political factions. On the Democratic-Republican side, Madison, like Jefferson, saw the resolutions as an appropriate protest within the framework of the Constitution he had helped write, and both men saw them as the basic right of state legislatures to nullify federal law. But the Federalists saw both resolutions as a fundamental attack on the basic authority of the federal government and, indeed, on the Constitution itself.
While Adams never repudiated the Alien and Sedition Acts, he did end the war fever. Through emissaries, Adams received a signal that France did not want war, and after British Admiral Horatio Nelson destroyed the French fleet in the Battle of the Nile in October 1798, any remote possibility of a French invasion of the United States disappeared. Adams had become convinced that Hamilton was trying to stir up a war for his own political ambitions. The president called him “a man devoid of every moral principle.” In February 1799, Adams told the Senate that he himself was committed “to embrace every plausible appearance of probability of preserving or restoring tranquility,” and he also asked them to approve a new ambassador to France to replace Pinckney. Many Federalists were enraged that Adams would try yet again for peace, and he had to endure a shouting match with Hamilton—now a private citizen but an influential one. He also had to fire his own Secretary of State Timothy Pickering, who was ready for war, and replace him with a close political ally, John Marshall (who would later become chief justice of the Supreme Court). But the Senate approved William Vans Murray as the new ambassador, and the new mission worked. It took all of 1799 and 1800 to negotiate, during which time the government of France changed from the Directory to the dictatorship of Napoleon Bonaparte, but peace came. The Convention of Mortefontaine ended the Quasi-War and protected U.S. shipping. Adams disbanded part of the army in May 1800 over the opposition
7.4
Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions
Resolutions written by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison that criticized the Alien and Sedition Acts and asserted the rights of states to declare federal law null and void within a state.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 201
uu
American Voices
The Kentucky Resolutions of 1798
Congress passed the Alien and Sedition Acts in 1798, a WW firestorm of protest broke out. Leaders of the Democratic-Republican Party saw the new laws as a direct attack on freedom of speech, a bedrock of democracy. They also opposed the legislation because they feared it would foster war with France and expand the army, navy, and federal power in general. In response they sought to undermine the laws. Jefferson secretly drafted the resolutions below, which were adopted by the Kentucky legislature in November 7 798, while Madison drafted similar resolutions for Virginia. These Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions not only attacked the Alien and Sedition Acts but also declared that, since the federal government was a compact of the states, any state could declare any federal law unconstitutional within the bounds of that state. This claim would have far-reaching implications in the decades leading up to the Civil War. Although most historians see the Alien and Sedition Acts as a dangerous attack on free speech, they also see the resolutions as an equally dangerous effort to undermine national unity.
1.	Resolved, That the several states composing the United States of America are not united on the principle of unlimited submission to their general government; but that, by compact, under the style and title of a Constitution for the United States, and of amendments thereto, they constituted a general government for special purposes, delegated to that government certain definite powers, reserving, each state to itself, the residuary mass of right to their own self-government; and that whensoever the general government assumes undelegated powers, its acts are unauthoritive, void, and of no force; that to this compact each state acceded as a state, and is an integral
party; that this government, created by this compact, was not made the exclusive or final judge of the extent of the powers delegated to itself, since that would have made its discretion, and not the Constitution, the measure of its powers; but that, as in all other cases of compact among powers having no common judge, each party has an equal right to judge for itself, as well of infractions as of the mode and measure of redress.
2.	Resolved... therefore, also, the same act of Congress, passed on the 14th day of July, 1798, and entitled "An Act in Addition to the Act entitled 'An Act for the Punishment of certain Crimes against the United States;'" [the Sedition Act]...(and all other their acts which assume to create, define, or punish crimes other than those so enumerated in the Constitution,) are altogether void, and of no force; and that the power to create, define, and punish, such other crimes is reserved, and of right appertains, solely and exclusively, to the respective states, each within its own territory.
Source: Library of Congress http://lccn.loc.gov/09021366
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What argument did Jefferson make in favor of a state's right to nullify federal legislation?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In what ways did Jefferson's position constitute a threat to national unity?
of his own party. He also pardoned John Fries who had led a nonviolent rebellion against federal war taxes in Pennsylvania in 1799 and had been sentenced to death for treason. These actions cost Adams dearly, particularly among his own Federalists. But he considered the choice for peace against war his crowning achievement and ordered that his gravestone read “Here lies John Adams, who took upon himself the responsibility for peace with France in the year 1800.”
The Election of 1800
The political differences between the two leading candidates for president in 1800, President John Adams and Vice President Thomas Jefferson, could not have been clearer. But the methods for actually selecting the next president and vice president in 1800 could not have been more convoluted. None of the problems with the Electoral College that were seen in 1796 had been resolved. At that time, political parties had been informal alliances of like-minded individuals. By 1800, however, the Federalists and Democratic-Republicans were much better organized. They had come to represent
202 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
two distinct philosophies and sets of personal allegiances. Nevertheless, Americans still distrusted formal political parties. Within the parties, advocates of different positions schemed to defeat not only the other party but also rivals within their own party. In December 1799, just as the maneuvering for the 1800 election was starting, news came that George Washington had died at his home in Mount Vernon, Virginia. People of all political factions mourned the loss of a unifying leader but also knew that the next election would be more divisive than ever.
Despite the fact that most of the Constitution’s authors did not want nominations of presidential candidates to occur before the selection of presidential electors, in 1800, each party’s Congressional delegations nominated the candidates in semisecret caucuses. When the Democratic-Republican caucus met on May 11,1800, it was clear that Jefferson would be their nominee for president. Several candidates were considered for vice president, but the Democratic-Republicans wanted someone who would help them win New York, which they saw as the key to the White House. The man to deliver New York’s votes was Aaron Burr. Few politicians, including Jefferson, trusted or respected Burr, but Jefferson did not intend to lose the presidency twice. In an ill-fated decision, the caucus and party leaders pledged that every elector would vote for both Jefferson and Burr. Everyone simply assumed that somehow Jefferson would receive the most votes and become president with Burr, the runner up, becoming vice president, but that assumption proved to be a serious mistake.
Federalist maneuvering was equally complicated. There was general agreement that failure to support Adams would fatally split the party. But the caucus also chose Charles Cotesworth Pinckney of South Carolina, the brother of their 1796 vice presidential nominee, to be vice president, in part because he was known to be loyal to Hamilton and in part because his refusal to give a bribe to France in the XYZ Affair had made him a hero. Behind the scenes, Hamilton hoped, as he had in 1796, that he could somehow engineer Pinckney’s election as president. Once again, Adams found out about Hamilton’s plans and was furious.
Because the Constitution gave each state the right to choose its presidential electors any way it wished, the actual voting for those electors was spread out over most of the year. In an early but crucial test, Burr was able to ensure New York’s electoral votes for the Jefferson-Burr ticket. Pennsylvania’s Democratic-Republican governor also promised to deliver its electoral votes for the Jefferson-Burr ticket or, if that failed, to simply prevent a vote to choose electors from taking place in that state so Adams could not receive any votes there.
As other states continued to select their presidential electors in the summer and fall of 1800, the contest remained fierce. A Federalist newspaper said a vote for the Democratic-Republicans was a vote “for the tempestuous sea of anarchy and misrule; for arming the poor against the rich; for fraternizing with the foes of God and man” while a Democratic-Republican paper asked people to choose between, “Peace or war, happiness or misery, opulence or ruin!” The Sedition Act made direct attacks on President Adams dangerous, but the press was far from neutral, and anger at that act added fuel to the Democratic-Republican fire.
Slaves could not vote, and slavery had not been a major issue in the previous presidential campaigns, but it was in 1800. Gabriel Prosser and Jack Bowler were slaves on a Virginia plantation not far from the state capital in Richmond. Throughout the summer, they were planning a slave uprising. Prosser promised death to all whites except “Quakers, Methodists, and French people,” that is, whites known to support abolition. Over 1,000 slaves were involved, forging swords from sickles, making their own bullets, and designing a flag that read “Death or Liberty.” The uprising was set for Saturday, August 30, when they planned to meet at the Prosser plantation, kill the white owners, and march on Richmond. However, a terrible storm on August 30 scattered the slave army, and Governor James Monroe discovered the plan and called out the state militia. The leaders of the uprising were quickly tried and executed, but the prospect of a slave uprising terrified the southern states.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 203
Campaign banners were popular in the 1800 campaign, including this streamer that says, "T. Jefferson, President of the United States of America; John Adams—no more."
The issue of slavery also complicated the presidential campaign. Both political parties were divided internally over it. Adams hated slavery, but Pinckney, his running mate, was one of the largest slave owners in South Carolina. Both Jefferson and Burr owned slaves, Jefferson many of them. But Jefferson had also written in opposition to slavery. He needed northern Democratic-Republican votes in Pennsylvania and New York where abolitionism was gaining ground. Governor Monroe and Jefferson feared that too many slave executions would spark an abolitionist upheaval and cost them votes. On the other hand, leniency could cost them votes in the fearful southern states where Adams and Pinckney suddenly looked like the forces of stability.
Some slaves saw the ironies of the situation. Most of those arrested, including Prosser, simply remained silent, knowing that nothing they said would save them. One, however, calmly told the judges:
I have nothing more to offer than what General Washington would have had to offer, had he been taken by the British officers and put to trial by them. I have ventured my life in endeavouring to obtain the liberty of my countrymen, and am a willing sacrifice to their cause; and I beg, as a favour, that I may be immediately led to execution. I know that you have predetermined to shed my blood, why then all this mockery of a trial?
The tension between American freedom and American slavery, which was at the heart of the republic, surfaced in the 1800 contest.
Jefferson’s religious beliefs also became a major election topic. Yale’s president, Timothy Dwight, gave a speech asking whether the country was going to elect “men who set truth at nought...who doubt the being and providence of God.” Everyone knew who Dwight was talking about, given Jefferson’s liberal religious views. Many clergy and laypeople claimed that Jefferson had renounced the basic beliefs of Christianity. In fact, Jefferson was a deist who believed that God tended to leave the universe on its own. Adams himself, who tended to agree with Jefferson in religious matters, though he was more discreet and more often seen in established churches, privately expressed “indignation at the charge of irreligion,” but did not say anything publically during the heat of the campaign.
204 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Ihe Hamilton-Adams feud could not be kept so quiet. In the summer of 1800, Hamilton wrote A Letter from Alexander Hamilton, Concerning the Public Conduct and Character of John Adams, Esq., President of the United States. Hamilton seems to have meant the 54-page document for the private use of a few electors, whom he was attempting to switch from Adams to Pinckney, but a delighted Democratic-Republican press found the document, and it became public. In words that could, ironically, have been prosecuted under the Sedition Act, Hamilton attacked Adams for his “great intrinsic defects of character,” including “his disgusting egotism,” “eccentric tendencies,” “bitter animosity,” and “ungovernable temper.” Ihe split among the Federalists was complete. Noah Webster, a tough Federalist from Connecticut and author of the first American dictionary, wrote to Hamilton that, if Jefferson was elected as a result of this Federalist split, “the fault will lie at your door and...your conduct on this occasion will be discerned little short of insanity.
In 1800, the candidates campaigned openly, unlike 1796. The ever-diffident Adams, surprisingly, seemed to enjoy campaigning, giving speeches in key states. Jefferson considered similar campaign stops but was dissuaded by Virginia’s Governor Monroe. Instead, he engaged in a nonstop correspondence with supporters and in less public forms of campaigning, offering financial and editorial advice to friendly newspaper editors.
Given the advantages that the Democratic-Republicans held, ranging from the unpopularity of the Alien and Sedition Acts to the split among the Federalists, the election was surprisingly close. Adams swept New England and most of the northern states while Jefferson held strong in New York and Pennsylvania and most of the southern states. Ihe three-fifths clause, which counted slaves in the population though they were not allowed to vote, gave the southern states an advantage in the electoral college that ultimately tipped the election for Jefferson. Ihe last state to vote was South Carolina, and when the Jefferson-Burr ticket carried every electoral vote in that state, the new Washington, D.C., Democratic-Republican paper The National Intelligencer ran a headline on December 12, “Splendid Intelligence...Mr. Jefferson may...be considered as our future President.” But it was
not to be so simple (see Map 7-2).
Because the Democratic-Republicans had been so well organized, Jefferson and Burr each received 73 electoral votes, putting them well ahead of Adams and Pinckney. But because Jefferson and Burr had each received 73 votes, the House of Representatives would now have to decide between two candidates who had tied in the election. In addition, though the Democratic-Republicans had also won a majority in the new Congress, the old Congress, with a Federalist majority, would decide the election. Many Democratic-Republicans, including Jefferson, thought that Burr had engineered this outcome to make himself president. Many Federalists suddenly gave Burr a second look. As far as anyone knows, Burr did not negotiate with the Federalists. But he also did not give way to Jefferson.
Ihe country was stuck.
When Congress heard the tally of electoral votes, the outcome was 73 for Jefferson, 73 for Burr, 65 for Adams, 64 for Pinckney, and one for John Jay. Ihe House then began to vote between the top two. But it remained deadlocked. Finally, Hamilton, who had fought for so long with Thomas Jefferson on almost every major government policy, convinced his fellow Federalists that Burr, whom he knew all too well from New York politics, was a dangerous man of too much ambition and too little morality.
On February 17, Thomas Jefferson was elected president by a vote
a-
~ a
j

k—3
Gulf of Moxie
Electoral Vote (%)
■IBillipi
(53)
65
(47)
SDR 5 F5
DR 8 F4
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
4
3 -X

PACIFIC
OCEAN
m Nonvoting territories
THOMAS JEFFERSON
(Jeffersonian Republican) JOHN ADAMS
(Federalist) MAP 7-2 The 1800 Presidential Election. The 1800 electoral contest between incumbent John Adams and Thomas Jefferson reflected regional differences—Adams carried all of New England and Jefferson most of the South, but middle states, especially New York, decided the outcome.
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 205
of 10 state delegations to four, with two not voting. Burr became vice president. It had been a long year and a long election cycle, and it would never be repeated in quite the same form.
7.4
Quick Review Why did factions and political parties arise in the 1790s?
CONCLUSION
George Washington was elected unanimously as the first president of the United States in 1789. This unity, largely the result of his popularity as the general who had defeated the British, would be short lived as factions began to form around personalities and around very different ideas of what the government of the new nation should look like. Alexander Hamilton, Washingtons secretary of treasury, was an especially forceful advocate of a strong and activist central government. Those who agreed with this position came to be known as the Federalists. Hamilton had been charged with making the government financially solvent. He quickly convinced Congress to pass import taxes to pay off the Revolutionary War debts, to build up the national government, and especially to fund the U.S. Army. In addition, Hamilton persuaded Congress to launch the Bank of the United States as well as establish a currency system and a mint. He believed that making possible financial credit for both government and business would ensure the strength of the new republic.
In opposition to Hamilton, Thomas Jefferson, Washington’s first secretary of state, envisioned an idealized agrarian republic with a weak central government. He believed that the strongest powers should remain with the states and in the hands of the people. Jefferson distrusted banks, a standing army, and centralized authority.
As promised to many who ratified the Constitution, James Madison authored amendments to the Constitution that became the Bill of Rights. These amendments spelled out limits on the federal government. They guaranteed that the nation could not establish a state religion, limit free speech or a free press, or prohibit people from keeping firearms. They also promised protection from illegal search and seizure. Perhaps most important to those who initially opposed the Constitution, the Bill of Rights limited the power of the federal government itself to only those things that were specifically mentioned in the Constitution and reserved all else to the states and the people.
Washington’s tenure as president during two terms in office was filled with conflict. He took the role of mediator and negotiator as often as possible, including efforts to balance Hamilton and Jefferson, but mediating was a messy business. In the Northwest Territory, he tried to control disorderly settlers whose support he also needed. After illegally moving into territory in the Ohio River Valley and Kentucky, those settlers expected support from state and national governments when Indians defended their lands. As president, Washington sought a more powerful army to manage the conflict. In spite of initial Native American victories, before Washington left office, all of the tribes of the region then known as the Northwest had been defeated and millions of acres opened for white settlements. In response to a new federal tax on whiskey, a rebellion—the Whiskey Rebellion—broke out among settlers in western Pennsylvania who had no intention of paying the tax. With a massive show of force, the Washington administration brought the rebellion to an end, but once the rule of federal law had been secured, Washington pardoned individual rebels. The French Revolution began just as Washington was taking office, but it was during his second term (1793—1797) that it dominated the administration’s interest. Washington was determined to maintain neutrality as revolutionary France went to war with Great Britain and as large numbers of Americans came to support each side in the war.
206 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
After serving as president for two terms, Washington retired. In a close race, his vice president John Adams defeated former secretary of state Thomas Jefferson, and under the rules then in force, Adams became president and Jefferson vice president. Four years later, the two again ran against each other, but this time, after a hard fought and exceedingly complicated election process, Thomas Jefferson became the third president of the United States.
By the time Jefferson was inaugurated, the factions that Washington abhorred had begun to harden into two political parties. The Federalists who supported a strong central government, a national bank, and the development of commercial enterprise were represented in the presidential contests by John Adams, but Alexander Hamilton, who privately feuded constantly with Adams, drove the party’s ideas. On the other side, the Antifederalists, or Democratic-Republicans, led by Jefferson, were the party of those supporting states’ rights, a weak federal government, and agrarian—often slaveholding—interests. Once Jefferson defeated Adams, the Federalists would never elect another president, but the philosophical divide between the two parties would dominate American politics for decades.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How well did the early American government under the Constitution uphold its spirit and ideals? How did issues not addressed within the document lead to controversy later on?
Chapter 7 Practicing Democracy 207
Chapter 7 Chapter Review
7.1
7.2
CONVENING A CONGRESS, INAUGURATING A PRESIDENT, ADOPTING A BILL OF RIGHTS________________________________
Analyze the first federal elections and theadoption of the Bill of Rights.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
What were the most important priorities for the new Congress? Why?
2.	Chronological Reasoning
What concerns raised by the Antifederalists during the debate over ratification were addressed by the first 10 amendments to the Constitution?
CREATING AN ECONOMY: ALEXANDER HAMILTON AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC SYSTEM_____________________________________
Analyze the enduring argument begun by Hamilton's economic vision for the United States and the alternative vision of Jefferson and Madison.
Review Questions
3.	Constructing an Argument
Why was the resolution of the federal government’s fiscal problems so critical to the success of the new nation?
4.	Historical Interpretation
What larger political and regional divisions were reflected in the debates over debt assumption and the First Bank of the United States?
5.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Hamilton’s and Jefferson’s visions of the future development of the United States. Why did Jefferson believe that small, independent farmers were the foundation of American society and government? Why did Hamilton disagree?
SETTING THE PACE: THE WASHINGTON ADMINISTRATION
73
Explain the precedents set by George Washington's presidential administration.
Review Questions
6.	Historical Interpretation
Why did events in the western regions of the country occupy so much of Washington’s time and attention? Why did he think events in the region were so important to the country’s future?
7.	Crafting Arguments
In your opinion, why did diplomatic efforts fail to resolve the conflict in the Northwest Territory between Indian peoples and white settlers? What evidence can you provide to support your argument?
8.	Contextualization
Why did so many Americans identify with the revolutionary cause in France? How did public reaction to the French Revolution contribute to the increasingly partisan nature of American politics in the 1790s?
7.4
THE BIRTH OF POLITICAL PARTIES: ADAMS AND JEFFERSON
Explain the growing split between the Federalist and Democratic-Republican Parties, including how the French Revolution and the personal differences among Hamilton, Adams, and Jefferson affected American politics.
Review Questions
9.	Crafting Arguments
Should the election of 1796 be considered a contest between two political parties? Why or why not?
10.	Contextualization
What light do the Alien and Sedition Acts shed on the nature of American politics at the end of the 1700s? How might a supporter of the acts have defended them?
208 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
People, Land, and a National Identity
1800-1848
PART OUTLINE
