CHAPTER 30
Entering a New Time, 2001-to the Present
The Impact of September 11,2001
Hurricane Katrina and its Aftermath
The Financial Crisis of 2008
New Liberals, New Conservatives
1980-1989
No American president since Franklin Roosevelt has so dominated the nation's politics and, indeed, culture as Ronald Reagan, shown here at his inauguration in 1981.
The voters who gave Ronald Reagan his margin of victory over Jimmy Carter in 1980 were a diverse lot. Working-class whites, north and south, sometimes called “Reagan Democrats,” were alienated by the civil rights and protest movements of the 1960s and 1970s. Many feared crime, which they tended to see as a “black issue,” and wanted a champion of “law and order.” The coalition also included middle-class and upper-middle-class suburbanites in revolt over taxes, especially rising property taxes, and government regulations that they thought were intrusive. The antitax movement led to the passage of Proposition 13 in California in 1978, a law sponsored by a private citizen, Howard Jarvis, which significantly cut California’s property taxes and ultimately the states vaunted government services. Other states copied Proposition 13, reducing taxes and public services. A third group of Reagan supporters were social conservatives—Catholics and Protestants associated with the religious right—for whom the key issues were their opposition to abortion, sexual and reproductive freedoms, gay rights, and the teaching of evolution as well as their desire for prayer in the public schools. In seeking to limit abortion or gay rights, the social conservatives wanted a more activist government, even if they otherwise favored a smaller government and lower taxes.
These diverse groups also shared a staunch hostility to communism and believed that presidents from Franklin Roosevelt to Richard Nixon had been too soft. They were united in their anger at those they considered elitist—celebrities in Hollywood, the media, universities, and the federal government. In Ronald Reagan, the former actor and two-term governor of California, they
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the changes in government and in the larger society in the times known as the Reagan Revolution.
A RAPIDLY CHANGING U.S. GOVERNMENT
Explain Reagan's impact on the United States and the world.
THE CHANGING NATURE OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY
Explain international economic developments that shaped the United States.
CHANGES IN THE REST OF THE COUNTRY
Explain cultural changes in the United States during the 1980s.
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revolution
Significant Dates
Ronald Reagan defeats Carter in election for U.S. president
U.S.
Center for Disease Control recognizes a new disease, HIV/AIDS Congress passes Reagan tax and budget bills
Reagan fires PATCO strikers
Boland amendment prohibits funding for overthrowing the government of Nicaragua
National Security Decision Directive 75 ends "peaceful coexistence" with U.S.S.R
Reagan calls Soviet Union the "evil empire"; Strategic Defense Initiative announced
Bombing of Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon; U.S. invasion of Grenada
National Security Council launches what becomes Iran-Contra scandal Ronald Reagan reelected
Democratic Leadership Council created to move Democratic Party to the center
Beginning of savings and loan collapse of the late 1980s
Movie actor Rock Hudson dies of AIDS
First of five summit meetings between Reagan and Gorbachev held in Geneva
Soviet nuclear reactor at Chernobyl explodes, worst nuclear accident in history
Reagan-Gorbachev summit at Reykjavik, Iceland; Congress passes Tax Reform Act
Tower Commission report on Iran-Contra arms for hostages deal released
George H.W. Bush defeats Michael Dukakis for president
found a hero who, they believed, would not disappoint them as had Richard Nixon. This chapter is a look at the Reagan Revolution, the wide-ranging changes in the federal government, in U.S. international relations, and in American culture that took place while Ronald Reagan was president, some with his support and some in spite of his best efforts.
A RAPIDLY CHANGING U.S. GOVERNMENT
Explain Reagan's impact on the United States and the world.
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
Reagan Revolution
Major changes in American politics under the leadership of Ronald Reagan, including cuts in taxes and domestic spending and increased military spending.
Many federal government programs that dated from the New Deal changed drastically during what came to be known as the Reagan Revolution. By the end of the 8 years that Ronald Reagan was president, taxes took less of peoples incomes, the federal debt ballooned, and a 50-year period in which labor unions could rely on a friendly government came to an end. The Cold War, which had been the dominant element in U.S. foreign policy since the end of World War II, also ended. Both the Republican and Democratic parties emerged from the Reagan Revolution more conservative than they had been. Supporters and detractors all agreed that the presidency of Ronald Reagan was a significant turning point in the United States.
Ronald Reagan and the Reagan Coalition
When Ronald Reagan became president, he was only 1 month short of his 70th birthday, the oldest man ever elected to the office. Reagan was born in the small town of Tampico, Illinois, in 1911. His father was a shoe salesman and an alcoholic who was unsuccessful in his search for better jobs until he was hired by the New Deal’s WPA. His mother, who worked as a seamstress, was a religious woman who made sure that the young Ronald and his brother were brought up in church. He said of his childhood, “We didn’t live on the wrong side of the tracks, but we lived so close we could hear the whistle real loud.” Handsome and popular, Reagan was elected high school class president and then student body president at Eureka College in Illinois.
Soon after college, and after a brief stint as a sports announcer in Iowa, Reagan left the Midwest for Hollywood where he appeared in 53 films between 1937 and 1953. It was steady work and it paid well. Reagan later said that he generally made two pictures per year, earning $300,000 to $400,000 per film, and would have worked harder to make more pictures if not for the high tax bite. The film work took Reagan a long way from the marginal economic status of his childhood. He married and later divorced Jane Wyman, whose Hollywood career was more successful than his; he would be the first divorced person elected president. He was popular in Hollywood and was elected president of the Screen Actors Guild from 1947 to 1952, a position he used to identify suspected Communists in the film industry. When he became U.S. president, he was the first former union president to do so. During his Hollywood years, Reagan remained a Democrat, voting for Harry Truman in 1948 and against Richard Nixon for the Senate in 1950.
In 1952 he married Nancy Davis and left a declining Hollywood career to become a spokesperson for the General Electric Company, serving as the TV host of the General Electric Theater program from 1954 to 1962. Working for GE, he also gave pep talks to workers at GE plants, touted GE products, and spoke about the corporation’s views on taxes and government regulation to business groups. In his GE career, as in Hollywood, Reagan mastered the art of connecting with audiences, especially, maintaining a relaxed and genial presence in the face of lights, crowds, and distractions as well as delivering content from a script. While at GE he also changed his party registration from Democrat to Republican.
By the time Reagan left GE in 1962, he was as well-known for his political views as his acting. He supported Barry Goldwater in 1964. In a standard stump speech that came to be known simply as “the speech,” Reagan said that the choice facing Americans was “whether we believe in our capacity for self-government or whether we abandon the American Revolution and confess that a little intellectual elite in a far-distant
Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
810 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New
capital can plan our lives for us better than we can plan them ourselves.” Ihe speech did not elect Goldwater, but it did bring Reagan to the attention of a crucial audience-rich Republican conservatives who agreed to back him if he would run for governor of California in 1966. The incumbent governor, Democrat Edmund G. “Pat” Brown, a tough campaigner who had defeated Richard Nixon in 1962, was seeking a third term in 1966. Reagan defeated him in the fall election and won reelection as governor in 1970.
Reagan talked a more conservative line all through his presidency than he practiced while he was governor of California. While he was tough on student protests, raised tuition at California s public colleges and universities, and ousted Clark Kerr as the president of the University of California, he was willing to compromise with a Democratic legislature on other matters. He raised taxes to cover a budget shortfall as well as signed bills supporting liberalized abortion rights and bilingual education. Some of his conservative supporters were nervous about his positions but valued his skill as a campaigner. As a conservative governor of the nation’s largest state, Reagan quickly became a presidential contender. He almost defeated Gerald Ford for the 1976 Republican nomination and easily defeated George H.W. Bush to win the 1980 nomination and then the presidential election against Jimmy Carter. As president, he did not disappoint most of his supporters.
28.1
282
283
Reaganomics—Supply-Side Tax Cuts, Military Growth, and Electoral Politics
Reagan came to office with three priorities: increasing military spending to ensure that the United States was significantly stronger than the Soviet Union, cutting domestic spending and government-sponsored social programs, and cutting the federal income tax. He was willing to compromise on almost everything else.
The antitax crusade had helped elect Reagan, and he surrounded himself with advisors who developed new economic theories to defend a tax cut even as he sought increased military spending. Reagan justified the tax cut with an economic theory known as supply-side economics. As defined by Republican congressman Jack Kemp and Democratic senator Lloyd Bentsen, supply-side referred to stimulating the economy, not by means of federal spending—the traditional approach since the New Deal—but, rather, by means of supporting the supply side—cutting taxes to foster private investment that might then lead to the creation of new jobs.
Tax cut proponents also cited what is called the “Laffer curve.” Developed in the 1970s by Jude Wanniski, a correspondent for the Wall Street Journal, and economist Arthur Laffer, the curve meant to show that higher taxes reduced government income by reducing the incentive to work and earn taxable wages. At the extreme ends, the curve made complete sense. Zero tax would not impact work and earning in any way, and a 100 percent tax would certainly stifle most work. But the point in between, where taxes really cut into the will to work and where decreased tax rates might actually increase government income, was hard to pinpoint.
When Reagan first called for a 30 percent tax cut and used Laffer and the supply-side arguments to justify his position, his main rival for the 1980 Republican nomination, George Bush, called it “voodoo economics, and Jimmy Carter called Reagan s tax plans, “rebates for the rich, deprivation for the poor, and fierce inflation for all of us.” But after he became president, Reagan dismissed criticism, saying of the economists who challenged his ideas, “They’re the sort of people who see something works in practice and wonder if it works in theory.” In spite of a lack of evidence in either practice or theory, the president made a tax cut his first priority, and in August, 48 congressional Democrats—their Democratic colleagues called them boll weevils joined the Republican minority to pass a cut in federal income taxes that reduced the top rate on individual income from 70 to 50 percent. The president won the first of his three goals for his Reagan Revolution—the implementation of “Reaganomics,” as his economic policy came to be called—in less than 100 days in office.
supply-side economics
An economic theory that to stimulate the economy the best intervention is a tax cut that would stimulate the "supply side."
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revolution 811
28.1
The Reagan cuts in domestic programs, including health insurance benefits for the elderly through Medicare, were not done without protest, as shown here. But few protests had a major impact on the cuts themselves.
In addition to the tax cut, Congress passed a modified version of Reagan’s budget. He did not get all the cuts he wanted, but the new federal budget reduced domestic spending significantly. Reagan also used his administrative authority to cut a number of additional federal programs, including food stamps and other programs for the poor as well as Social Security benefits for people with disabilities. Some 500,000 people were removed from the Social Security disability list. Another 300,000 who had been employed through the Carter administration’s Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) lost their government-sponsored jobs. The cuts were not the wholesale abolition of welfare that Reagan advocated, but they represented a substantial cut in the federal safety net that had been growing since the 1930s. At the same time, some programs such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and federal tax credits for the poor actually expanded during the Reagan years.
While campaigning for the presidency, Reagan also promised to expand the military so the United States would, without question, be the most powerful nation on earth. As a candidate, he said, “You spend what you need.” As president, he got congressional approval to develop a new B-2 bomber as well as cruise and MX missiles and to expand the Navy. During his first term in office, from 1981 to 1985, the total defense spending of the United States rose by 34 percent, from $171 billion to $229 billion.
Within months of the new administration coming to office, Americans understood that the change in Washington was significant, indeed, that some federal policies that had been in place since the 1930s were no longer going to continue. In addition to the tax cuts and expanded military spending, the new administration showed its attitude when the members of the Professional Air Traffic Controllers’ Organization (PATCO)—the people who guide airplanes on take-off and landing—went on strike. The president told the members of the union, who were federal employees, that they had 48 hours to go back to work or they would be fired. When almost two-thirds of PATCOs members stayed out on strike, Reagan fired all 11,000 of them. They permanently lost their jobs, and the union was destroyed. People worried about the safety of air travel with so many veteran controllers gone, but the signal that this administration was going to have a different view of unions was clear. Organized labor, used to having a friend in the White House, was demoralized. Other strikes were also defeated,
812 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
including an especially bitter one by the meatpackers at the Hormel plant in Minnesota in 1985-86. Union membership dropped from one-fourth of the U.S. workforce to one-sixth during Reagan s two terms. Organized labor, long a major force in American society, was on a long slow decline, something that delighted the president and his conservative backers.
In the short term, the Reagan initiatives did not improve the nation’s economy. The president strongly supported Federal Reserve Chair Paul Volcker, whom Carter had appointed. Both presidents told Volcker to curb inflation no matter what the cost. Volcker did, with tough policies that sent unemployment above 10 percent in 1982, the highest since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Many people lost jobs, and new jobs were often in low-paying service sectors of the economy. Homelessness doubled while Reagan was in office from an estimated 200,000 to 400,000. The recession of the early Reagan years hurt the president’s popularity, and the Republicans lost seats in Congress in the 1982 elections. Reagan, with his optimism and self-confidence, asked the nation to Stay the Course.” By 1983, the national economy started to improve and continued to do so through the last 5 years of Reagan’s tenure. Economists argued whether the improvement was due to the tax cuts or expanded military spending, but in either case, a strong economy made Reagan more popular.
One result of the Reagan economic agenda was rapid growth in the federal deficit. The tax cut did not bring in as much new revenue as estimated, while the expansion of military spending more than offset cuts in domestic programs. The total federal deficit nearly tripled during the Reagan years from $914 billion to $2.7 trillion. More than one supporter saw the deficit as Reagan’s greatest failure. The United States, which had been a major creditor nation since World War I, became the world’s largest debtor nation. The government kept borrowing money to cover the federal deficit while individuals borrowed money—often by running up credit card debt. If some complained that Americans were maintaining a living standard beyond their means, they quickly noted that the worst offender was the U.S. government. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, once an advisor to Richard Nixon and who was a Democratic Senator from New York throughout the Reagan years, warned that the huge deficits virtually guaranteed that new federal initiatives to improve the lives of average or poor citizens were now off the table.
Reagan faced the prospect of reelection in 1984 with some significant strengths and some formidable weaknesses. To challenge him, the Democrats had, after an intense primary battle with Colorado senator Gary Hart, selected former vice president Walter Mondale as the Democratic candidate for president. In an historic move, Mondale asked New York Representative, Geraldine Ferraro, to be his running mate, the first time a woman was on the ticket of a major political party. At 73, Reagan seemed old, especially when in one debate with Mondale he seemed to lose track of a story he was telling. Reagan dismissed the issue saying, “I will not make age an issue in this campaign. I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent s youth and inexperience.”
Reagan could not so easily dismiss other issues, however. Labor unions almost unanimously supported Mondale, although because of Reagan s policies they had far less clout. Most African-Americans supported Mondale, continuing a move by black voters to the Democratic Party that was speeded by Reagan s inattention to their needs. Moreover, Reagan’s silence on the rising epidemic of AIDS, a new and deadly disease, created some of his toughest enemies. Even social and religious conservatives who had flocked to Reagan in 1980 were disappointed. He had done little more than talk about many of their issues such as school prayer during his first term. As president, he never gave a speech to an antiabortion audience. However, conservatives did not have another candidate.
Other developments helped Reagan in 1984. By 1983, the economy started to turn around. More Americans had jobs and people were buying more goods, often on credit, including personal computers, video cassette recorders (VCRs), and telephone answering machines that had not been available in the 1970s.
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revolution 813
Morning Again in America
The campaign slogan of Ronald Reagan's reelection effort in 1984.
President Ronald Reagan looks to his left as a secret service agent places a hand on his shoulder and pushes the President into his limousine after he was shot leaving a Washington hotel, March 30,1981.
Reagan also benefited from an upsurge of popular patriotism that he had helped to foster. The space shuttle program had been years in the making since the days when Americans worried about Sputnik and Soviet leadership in space, but Reagan benefit-ted from the good will when the first space shuttle was successfully launched in April 1981. Reagan’s tough line with the Soviet Union pleased anti-Communists, and the fact that at the end of his first term he was the first president since Herbert Hoover never to have met with a Soviet leader did not worry them. In June 1984, Reagan traveled to France for the 40th anniversary of the D-Day landing that ended World War II. In a series of events carefully scripted by his communications director, Michael Deaver, he led a series of jubilant and patriotism-filled celebrations honoring veterans and American power. Later that summer, the Olympics were held in Los Angeles, and Reagan led the celebrations, emphasizing how far the country had come since the boycott of the games in Moscow only 4 years before. Reagan’s wealthy supporters also gave him a huge financial edge over Mondale.
Perhaps most of all, Reagan’s own sunny disposition made people like him. His TV ads reinforced Reagan’s message that it was “Morning Again in America. His optimism was on full display when on March 30, 1981, Reagan was shot while leaving a speaking event. His press secretary James Brady was severely wounded and permanently disabled. Few knew at the time how seriously the president had been wounded when a bullet lodged in his left lung and he bled heavily. But just before entering surgery, Reagan looked at his wife, Nancy, and said, “Honey, I forgot to duck,” and then asked the surgeons, “Please tell me you’re all Republicans.” That sort of pluck made him popular even with people who disagreed with his policies. In addition, his speaking style was extraordinary. His many years as an actor paid off. His friends called him, “The Great Communicator,” and even his toughest opponents admired him. The Democratic Speaker of the House, Tip O’Neill, who tangled with Reagan on many occasions, said of him, “He may not be much of a debater, but with a prepared text he’s the best public speaker I’ve ever seen... .I’m beginning to think that in this regard he dwarfs both Roosevelt and Kennedy.”
In the November 1984 vote, Reagan carried every state except Mondale’s home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia and won almost 60 percent of the popular vote. While Republicans continued to control the Senate 53 to 46, the Democrats controlled the House 252 to 182.
A year after the election, a group of Democrats, including Representative Richard Gephardt of Missouri and Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas organized the Democratic Leadership Council. These “New Democrats” argued that there was more to the election than Reagan’s personal popularity and that the Democratic Party was not going to win elections until it moved closer to the conservative mainstream. The creation of the Democratic Leadership Council was high tribute to the conservative shift in American opinion that constituted the heart of the Reagan Revolution and signaled a move away from traditional New Deal Democratic values that included significant government services, especially for those in need, and support for labor unions.
As Reagan entered his second term, people expected a repeat of the first. Reagan’s top priority remained reducing taxes, and in the mid-1980s, many Democrats agreed. A bipartisan coalition passed the Tax Reform Act of 1986 that cut the number of tax brackets from 14 to two, with tax rates of 15 and 28 percent respectively, while closing many tax loopholes. Led by the president, who had begun his term cutting the tax rate for the wealthiest Americans from 70 to 50 percent, the government had now cut it to 28 percent.
After the 1986 tax bill passed, Reagan devoted more and more of his time to foreign policy. He continued to appoint conservative judges and to support deregulation and the shrinking of the federal government, but he did not present major domestic policy initiatives in his last 2 years in office. Reagan had come to office a devout Cold Warrior. But before he left office, he presided over the greatest change in U.S.-Soviet relationships since Franklin Roosevelt had granted official U.S. recognition to the Soviet Union in the 1930s.
814 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-ToThe Present
Expanding the Cold War—From Star Wars to Iran Contra
When Ronald Reagan became president in January 1981, he had virtually no foreign policy experience. He was more sophisticated as a politician than many of his detractors (and some of his supporters) admitted. Nevertheless, he had not spent much time outside of the United States and did not know much about foreign policy. He was served by a series of weak national security advisors as well as two secretaries of state, two secretaries of defense, and a strong director of central intelligence, William Casey, all of whom disliked each other intensely, kept major developments secret from each other, and at times implemented contradictory policies. First Lady Nancy Reagan also took an active role in policy discussions, especially when she feared that conservative ideologues were taking her husband in an unnecessarily hard-line direction. It was not an administrative structure leading to crisp and clear decision making. However, in the midst of apparent chaos, Reagan himself appeared to have been a far stronger leader than perceived, one who determined the main aspects of his foreign policy even as he left the details of implementation to others.
28.1
; M2
EFFORTS TO UNDERMINE COMMUNISM
Reagan had several deeply held beliefs that would drive his foreign policy. His fierce anticommunism, which first developed when he battled with perceived Communists in the film industry in the 1940s, was reinforced by his religious faith, which was offended by Communist atheism. His ability to articulate that passionate stance against communism had been honed through his speaking career for GE and as governor. He saw communism, as he once said, as “the focus of evil in the modern world,” and the United States as the exceptional carrier of goodness—the “shining city on a hill.” He disliked the longstanding policy of containment that had been at the core of American foreign policy from Truman to Carter. He did not want merely to contain communism where it was. He wanted to undermine existing Communist governments. Despite that fierce anticommunism, however, Reagan had a far greater horror of nuclear war than some of his fellow conservatives. His firm belief was that a nuclear war could “never be won and must never be fought.” During his first term, he never trusted the Soviets enough to engage in serious negotiations, but he was determined to avoid nuclear war.
During his first term, Reagan was harshly critical of the Soviet Union. In a 1983 speech to Christian evangelicals, Reagan referred to the Soviet Union as “the evil empire.” A year later, in August 1984, thinking that the microphone was turned off, Reagan said, “My fellow Americans, I am pleased to tell you today that I’ve signed legislation that will outlaw Russia forever. We begin bombing in five minutes.” It was a joke, but the Soviets found it frightening. Reagan also ordered a massive arms buildup. Worried about U.S vulnerability and believing that any negotiations needed to be from a position of strength, Reagan supported annual increases in the military budget between 1981 and 1986. He arranged the deployment of new intermediate-range missiles in Europe in 1983 and resisted serious talks with Soviet leaders.
Reagan’s goal of undermining communism where it already existed led also to other steps. In 1981, as protest movements spread in Poland and the Polish Communist government instituted martial law, Reagan imposed sanctions on Poland and on the Soviet Union: an end to landing rights in the United States for the Russian airline Aeroflot, a ban on the sale of equipment for a Soviet natural gas pipeline, and at the petty level—termination of the special parking privileges of Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin in the State Department garage. The administration secretly fun-neled some $20 million to Solidarity, the Polish protest movement, through the Vatican Bank, with the approval of Polish Pope John Paul II.
In March 1983, Reagan, against the almost unanimous advice of his foreign policy team who seldom agreed on anything, announced that the United States was going to develop a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). As the president described it, SDI would use U.S. technological know-how to create a series of space stations armed with lasers
the evil empire
A phrase that Reagan used for the Soviet Union in particular and all Communist countries in general.
Strategic Defense Initiative
President Reagan's program to defend the United States with sophisticated technologies, also known as "Star Wars."
Chapter 28 The Reagan Re^
815
that would destroy any enemy missiles fired at the United States. He thought that the long-standing U.S. policy dating to the Eisenhower administration of mutually assured destruction, in which each superpower had the ability to retaliate after a nuclear attack, was essentially a commitment to mutual suicide. In 1979, E war e er, the lead scientist in the development of the hydrogen bomb, told Reagan that for all its ability to build and launch missiles, the United States had virtually no defense against incoming missiles. As president, Reagan was determined to create one, to make Soviet missiles “impotent and obsolete.” Reagan was convinced that the United States could do it.
Senior advisors worried that SDI would be expensive, impractical, and a needless escalation of the Cold War. Critics called the whole system Star Wars, and worried that it would militarize space, drain the treasury, and ultimately turn out to be ineffective. Military contractors, however, loved SDI. The president was committed, and throughout his two terms, research and development of the system continued.
Only long after Reagan left office did it become clear how deeply fearful Soviet leaders were of the Reagan rhetoric and arms buildup, especially SDI. The Soviets feared that SDI would make them vulnerable to a U.S attack, one they could not resist if they could not retaliate. In September 1983, a Soviet satellite mistook blips for incoming U.S. missiles and the country went on full military alert. Only the courage of a young Soviet officer, who believed that there was a computer error and who overrode the system, appears to have avoided a World War III with millions of deaths in both countries. The Cold War had never been so dangerous.
MANAGING RELATIONS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
As the United States focused on the Soviet Union, the Reagan foreign policy advisors also viewed the rest of the world through the prism of the Cold War, sometimes with disastrous results. Regarding the Middle East, Reagan came to office with a generally pro-Israel point of view, a perspective that was supported by many Christian evangelicals in his political base. His team believed that Jimmy Carter s Camp David accords had tilted U.S. policy too closely toward Egypt and wanted to correct the balance. At the same time, they saw Israel, Egyph Jordan, and Saudi Arabia as U.S. allies and were prepared to sell military aircraft to the Saudis and to supply Israel with jet bombers and military hardware. Their goal was to create a strong buffer in the Middle East against Syria and Iraq, both of which were viewed as Soviet client states (see Map 28-1). 0	200	400 kilometers
r™i Israeli-occupied 1---J territories
MAP 28-1 The United States and the Middle c
Africa involved the United States in a series of crisps Hi VentS ln the Midd,e East, Afghanistan, and nort e^n 816 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present	nn9t e 1980s that would only expand in the 1 S'
In Afghanistan, Reagan expanded the Carter-era efforts to resist the Soviet occupation. In 1983 and 1984, the United States provided significant aid to the Mujahedeen opposition whom Reagan called “freedom fighters.” In 1985, when the Soviets escalated their involvement, Reagan ordered his military to do “what’s necessary to win,” and the United States began supplying the Afghan resistance with antiaircraft missiles and satellite-based intelligence on Soviet troop movements. Eventually, the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan, leaving the CIA-backed Taliban in control of the country. It was a short-term victory but one that came with significant long-term consequences not only for the people of Afghanistan but also for the United States.
In addition, the leader of Libya was cause for concern. Libya’s longtime leader Muammar Gaddafi had come to power in 1969, long before Reagan’s time. Most of his North African neighbors found him to be a troublemaker, but he especially liked to create trouble for the United States. Reagan was determined to respond. In 1981, the U.S. Navy conducted exercises off the Libyan coast, and when Libyan jets attacked, the Navy shot them down. As terrorism expanded across the Middle East, Reagan was sure Gaddafi was behind much of it. When a TWA flight was hijacked in June 1985 and a West German discotheque was bombed in December of that year, killing one U.S. soldier, Reagan retaliated. In April 1986, the United States bombed Gaddafi’s headquarters in Tripoli, destroying much of the Libyan air force and killing some 30 civilians including Gadaffi’s 15-month-old adopted daughter. For a time, Libya was quiet, but in December 1988, a Pan Am flight was blown up over Lockerbie, Scotland, and the plot was again traced to Libya. Nevertheless, Gadaffi maintained his hold on power until 2011.
Although the hostage crisis with Iran ended the day Reagan came to office in January 1981, the United States remained hostile to Iran because of the crisis. When Iran and Iraq went to war against each other in September 1980, the United States tended to wish both sides ill. However, as the war continued, members of Reagan’s National Security Council (NSC) became convinced that it might be possible to support moderates within the Iranian government and build a new U.S. relationship by supplying Iran with weapons. The United States also had good reason to believe that Iran had influence with forces in Lebanon that were holding seven U.S. citizens hostage. NSC staff, led by National Security Advisor Robert McFarlane, argued Iran might help free the hostages, which was a high priority for the president. Carrying forged Irish passports and traveling under assumed names, McFarlane and his deputy, Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, secretly visited Tehran. In spite of U.S. policy never to negotiate for the release of hostages and despite its official arms embargo of Iran, the United States sold over 2,000 missiles to Iran in 1985 and 1986. It was the beginning of the greatest foreign policy misadventure of the Reagan administration.
Reagan and his advisers were further pulled into Middle East conflicts when Israel invaded Lebanon in June 1982. Israel’s goal was to attack the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) presence in Lebanon and create a buffer against Syria. Reagan did not object, though he tried to get Israel to limit its engagement. Later that year, the United States sent a detachment of Marines to join an international peace effort in Lebanon. In October 1983, a truck loaded with TNT drove into the U.S. barracks killing 241 Marines. Americans, including the president, were horrified at the loss of life. The purpose the Marines were supposed to serve was always vague, and after the tragedy, the administration announced that the Marines were to be “redeployed” to ships off the coast where they moved in 1984.
In response to the experience in Lebanon, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and his top military advisor and future chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Colin Powell, crafted what became known as the Powell Doctrine. Henceforth, they said, U.S. soldiers would be sent overseas only as a last resort and only if the mission was clearly defined, attainable, supported by the public, and included an exit strategy, none of which had been true in the case of the deployment in Lebanon. The new restrictions would be honored more clearly in some cases than others. Toward the end of the Reagan administration, when Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and West Bank territories under the control of Israel rose up in what they called the intifada (or “shaking off’), the United States did little beyond urge both sides to negotiate.
28,1
28,2
283
Chapter 28 The Reagan Rew
81
DEALING WITH PERCEIVED THREATS IN LATIN AMERICA U.S.
policy in Central America, especially in El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua, was also shaped by the Cold War. Since the 1920s, Democratic and Republican administrations depended on a series of Latin American dictators to create a safe climate for U.S. business and ensure that there was no Communist influence in the government of their countries. What they did to their own citizens was of less concern to American authorities. By the time Reagan had come to office, the longtime dictator in Nicaragua, Anastasio Somoza, had been overthrown by a popular uprising, and the totalitarian regime in El Salvador was seriously threatened by similar opposition. Fearing Communist influence in such popular uprisings, the Reagan administration supported the besieged government of El Salvador and sought to overthrow the new government of Nicaragua (see Map 28-2). Jean Kirkpatrick, Reagan’s United Nations ambassador, said that Central America was “the most important place in the world for us.” Kirkpatrick also outlined a key Reagan policy of differentiating between authoritarian governments such as that of El Salvador, which Kirkpatrick said could in time be reformed into democracies, and totalitarian governments—particularly, the government of the Soviet Union and its client states—which she claimed would never change. Under the policy, the United States would provide support for the former and opposition to the latter.
The same month as the attack on the Marine barracks in Lebanon, October 1983, Reagan ordered U.S. troops into the small Caribbean island nation of Grenada, where a military coup had overthrown the previous government. Fearing growing Communist influence, and worried about U.S. medical students in Grenada, U.S. troops quickly defeated the coup leaders. Leaders in other countries and in the United Nations condemned the invasion as a violation of international law, but some, in and out of Grenada, were grateful for the U.S. role.
Even though a majority of the Congress wanted nothing to do with supporting Central American dictators or overthrowing governments, the administration was determined to see its will done. While rejecting a proposal to invade Cuba, made by
300
300
600 kilometers
Gulf of Mexico
Guatemala. Military coup against President Cerezo fails, May 1989; free elections held, 1993.
EL SALVADOR
El Salvador. Civil war, 1980-1990 opposing sides hold peace talks, 1990; peace treaty signed, 1992.
PACIFIC
OCEAN
A
Hss\.
600 miles
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Haiti. Duvalier forced out of office, Feb. 1986; military coup against elected government, 1991.
Jamaica. Former socialist Michael Manley elected prime minister, Feb. 1989.
JAMAICA
Antilles
Nicaragua. Sandinista rebels come to power, 1979; Sandinista government defeated by opposition candidate Violetta Barrios de Chamorro, Feb. 1990.
Puerto Rico (U.S.)
Caribbean Sea
Panama. U.S. forces invade and capture drug trafficker General Manuel Noriega, Dec. 1989; Noriega is flown to federal prison in United States, Jan. 1990.
Panama Canal. Canal Zone comes under Panamanian control, 1979; Canal comes under Panamanian control in 2000.
COLOMBIA
Grenada. U.S. and regional forces land after military coup, Oct. 1983; elections held, Dec. 1984.

& ®
MAP 28-2 The United States and the Americas. During the Reagan and Bush administrations, the United States intervened several times in Central America, especially in Nicaragua and El Salvador, and in the Caribbean.
818 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
V
Alexander Haig during his short tenure as secretary of state, Reagan greatly expanded military aid and sent military advisers to El Salvador. That support was authorized even while government-sanctioned death squads assassinated critics, including the Archbishop of San Salvador, Oscar Romero, murdered while he was saying mass in 1980.
The United States also determined to intervene in Nicaragua, where the new socialist Sandinista government was committed to land reform. In December 1981, Reagan, at the urging of CIA director Casey, authorized $20 million for covert operations to support the Nicaraguan Contras” (or counterrevolutionaries) who sought to overthrow the new government. The core of the Contra movement was a group of some 500 followers of Somoza, but it grew to an army of perhaps 10,000 who were trained in U.S.-sponsored camps in Honduras and sent back to Nicaragua with U.S.-supplied weapons to disrupt the workings of the Sandinista government. By 1984, Reagan was calling the Contras our brothers,” and he remained steadfast in their support.
By 1984, however, Congress was unhappy with the administrations Central American policy. As early as 1982, Congress passed the Boland Amendment, prohibiting the United States from seeking to overthrow the Sandinista government. Since Reagan insisted he was simply trying to get them to negotiate, he ignored that stipulation. But in 1984, when it came to light that the CIA had mined Nicaraguan ports, members of Congress—not only liberals but also conservatives, including Barry Goldwater—were furious. In October 1984, Congress passed stricter legislation that cut off all aid to the Contras.
With what seemed like an iron-clad prohibition of aid to the Contras, U.S. adventures in Central America seemed to be at an end. But Reagan did not give up easily. The president encouraged efforts of a young National Security staffer, Oliver North, to find new sources of aid, though it was never clear how much Reagan knew of the details of North’s enterprise. Since Congress had banned government aid to the contras, North sought donations from friendly governments in Taiwan, Brunei, and Saudi Arabia and from wealthy private U.S. citizens like beer magnate Joseph Coors. At least $50 million in such aid was delivered to the Contras.
Seeking to expand the aid, North and his mentor Casey had what they termed a “neat idea.” The United States was secretly selling arms to Iran. What if, they thought, the United States could make a profit on the clandestine arms shipments to Iran, and then use the funds to support the Contras? Congress would not have to appropriate any money, and no one needed to know.
The complex arrangement did not remain secret for long. In October 1986, an American cargo plane loaded with military supplies for the Contras was shot down in Nicaragua. The Sandinista government let the world know that, in spite of the two Boland Amendments, the United States was still providing significant aid to the Contras. A month later a Beirut, Lebanon, newspaper published an account, based on Iranian sources, of U.S. arms sales to Iran and the link to hoped-for hostage releases. People soon connected the two, and the scandal quickly became known as the arms for hostages” deal or simply as “Iran-Contra.’ The matter was serious. In selling arms to Iran and in funding the Contras, U.S. laws had been broken, laws that the White House clearly knew existed. Some in Congress talked of impeachment. As with Nixon at Watergate, the question was “what did the president know and when did he know it.
As the details of U.S. activity began to emerge, the president insisted that the government, “did not, repeat, did not trade arms or anything else for hostages.” He also asked Attorney General Ed Meese to investigate. Oliver North immediately began to shred documents in his office. Meese reported to the president that North had, in fact, not only sold arms to Iran—presumably to free hostages—but also used the profits to aid the Contras. National Security advisor John Poindexter met with Reagan, confirmed that Meese was right, and resigned. Reagan asked former Texas Senator John Tower to lead an investiga tion. A special prosecutor, Lawrence Walsh, was appointed, and Congress held hearings.
Reagan eventually had to admit, “I told the American people I did not trade arms for hostages. My heart and best intentions still tell me that it is true, but the facts and evidence tell me it is not.” Many were shocked that an administration that talked so
Boland Amendment
Two Amendments passed by Congress prohibiting the U.S. government from attempting to overthrow the leftist government of Nicaragua.
Iran-Contra
A plan to secretly sell arms to Iran in exchange for the release of hostages held in Lebanon and to use the profits to provide aid to the Contra forces of Nicaragua.
Chapter 28 The Reagan R<
ion 81
In his testimony before Congress regarding the Iran-Contra investigation, Oliver North looked and sounded like a hero in spite of the fact that he had obviously broken the law.
much about law and order was doing so many illegal things. Reagan clearly knew about the illegal sale of arms to Iran and the arms-for-hostages deals. Many also suspected that he knew about the transfer of funds to the Contras, although that was never proved. Poindexter and North insisted that the decision rested with them alone. Not everyone was convinced, but no “smoking gun” was found. North managed to testify brilliantly before Congress, portraying himself as a well-meaning patriot, and though Reagan’s approval rating plummeted, talk of impeachment ended.
Walsh continued his investigation after Reagan left office and eventually secured the indictment of several officials, but Reagans successor George H.W. Bush pardoned them. In 1994, Walsh concluded that Reagan probably should have been impeached, but by then, he was retired and ill. Iran-Contra seriously damaged Reagans reputation. As Reagan entered his last 2 years in office, many considered his foreign policy efforts to be a failure. Between 1987 and 1989, however, the president accomplished his great foreign policy triumph.
Ending the Cold War
During his first term, as Reagan talked tough and launched the arms buildup, he also refused to meet with Soviet leaders, in part, because he saw no point in such conversations and didn’t trust the Soviets and, in part, because of changes in Soviet leadership. Leonid Brezhnev, who had led the Soviet Union since Nikita Khrushchev was deposed in 1964, died in 1982. His successor Yuri Andropov died 2 years later, and the next leader, Konstantin Cherenko, died a year after that. Reagan said, “How am I supposed to get anyplace with the Russians...if they keep dying on me?” Then in 1985, a new and very different leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, came to power in the Soviet Union.
After a succession of hard-line Communists who were aging and ill, Gorbachev represented a new younger generation of reform-minded Soviet leaders who saw how desperately their country needed change. Top-down Soviet-style planning was strangling the economy. Matching the United States in military matters took a huge percentage of their nation’s limited wealth. The disastrous meltdown of the nuclear reactor at Chernobyl just after Gorbachev came to office further convinced him of the need for change. Gorbachev could be as charming and optimistic as Reagan,
820 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
but he was also a devoted Communist and a very tough leader. He called for major changes, perestroika, reform of the Soviet economic system while maintaining communism, and glasnost, more openness and freedom for Soviet citizens. He quickly concluded that matching the U.S. arms buildup was going to bankrupt the Soviet Union, and he sought a way to avoid the arms race.
After his reelection in 1984, Reagan was also ready to talk. By 1985, he had achieved the military buildup that he wanted and could negotiate from a position of strength. U.S. allies, especially those in Europe who lived on the front line of any conflict, were tired of Cold War tensions and increased pressure on the United States for a different policy. Nancy Reagan nudged her husband away from the hard-liners in his administration. Reagan also knew that his Cold War credentials gave him room to maneuver that another leader might not have.
By 1985, Reagan and Gorbachev were ready to work together. British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, known as the Iron Lady because of her ability to stand up to pressure, was a close ally and friend of Reagan. She assured him that Gorbachev was someone “with whom we can do business.” Reagan and Gorbachev began a private correspondence and then met for the first time in November 1985 at Geneva where they agreed in general to a reduction in nuclear arms. The following October, they met again at Reykjavik, Iceland. There, in a small house on the ocean, they got to know each other. They talked about their lives—Gorbachev had once wanted to be an actor—their grandchildren, and their hopes for the future. At one point, they frightened their respective staff when they reached a tentative agreement to abolish all nuclear weapons by 2000 and then moved the date back to 1995. That agreement floundered over Gorbachev’s insistence that they include SDI and Reagan’s refusal. The Reykjavik summit ended in anger over Star Wars and without any agreement, but the two men had established a personal bond.
In June 1987, Reagan traveled to Berlin, the flashpoint of the Cold War. Facing the Berlin Wall at the Brandenburg Gate he demanded, “Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!” The speech, which sounded much more like Reagan’s old line anticommunism than the new thaw in U.S.-Soviet relations, seemed to have been as much an effort to reassure the president’s conservative critics as an actual demand. But in fact, the steps that Reagan and Gorbachev were taking would lead to the end of the wall within 2 years, just after Reagan left office.
Soon after Reykjavik, the Soviet physicist Andrei Sakharov convinced Gorbachev that SDI would not work and could safely be ignored. The two leaders then authorized further negotiations on offensive weapons that led to a treaty dramatically reducing intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) and to onsite inspections so rigorous that they frightened the American CIA.
Critics in both countries thought the leaders were moving too fast. In the Senate, North Carolina’s Jesse Helms tried to stop any new treaty, and Howard Phillips of the Conservative Caucus called the president a “useful idiot for Soviet propaganda. Gorbachev, for his part, had to deal with military and civilian attacks for his capitulationist line” toward the United States. Even so, the momentum was not going to be stopped.
At their next summit in Washington, DC, in December 1987, Reagan signed the INF treaty in a well-publicized ceremony, and Gorbachev met and mingled with American crowds like a U.S. politician. The two seemed at ease with each
perestroika
Russian for "restructuring," efforts to make the Soviet economic and political systems more modern, flexible, and innovative.
glasnost
Russian for "openness," encouragement of new ideas and easing of political repression in the Soviet Union.
28.1
28.2
28.3
other. When Reagan included one of his favorite sayings, “trust, but verify,” in his remarks, Gorbachev interjected, “You repeat that at every meeting.” People celebrated “Gorby fever.” The Senate ratified the INF Treaty by a large vote in May 1988. The two countries also made significant progress in resolving the conflicts in Nicaragua and Afghanistan, plans for joint space missions, cultural and student exchanges, and emigration and human rights. They jointly sponsored a UN resolution calling for an end to the Iran-Iraq war. The same month that the Senate ratified the INF treaty, the two leaders met for a fourth time in Moscow. They walked through Red Square, called each other “old friends,” and talked with Russian citizens. When asked about his earlier Cold War speeches, Reagan said they were from “another time, another place.”
Chapter 28 The Reagan Rj
28.1
283
283
Before Reagan left Moscow, the United States and Soviet Union had essentially normalized their relationship. For all intents and purposes, the Cold War was over.
The Strained Election of 1988
As a candidate in the Republican primaries in 1980, George Bush had called Ronald Reagans economic plans, voodoo economics. While Democrats had a field day with the term once he became Reagans vice president, Bush was a loyal member of the Reagan team, so loyal that some thought he had disappeared, but those who thought that way underestimated him considerably.
George Herbert Walker Bush was a child of privilege. His father was a successful banker and Republican senator from Connecticut. Bush attended private schools and expected to attend Yale when World War II intervened. While Ronald Reagan made war movies in Hollywood for the government, Bush flew more than 50 combat missions in the South Pacific and was shot down twice. After the war, he married Barbara Pierce, attended Yale, and then moved to Texas to make his fortune in the oil business. He served two terms in the House of Representatives from Houston. He was defeated when he ran for the Senate in 1970 but was subsequently appointed head of the Republican Party, nominal U.S. Ambassador to China after the Nixon trip, and head of the CIA for Gerald Ford.
The conservative wing of the Republican Party never trusted Bush, especially after his “voodoo economic” remarks, but also because of his lack of enthusiasm for their social issues. Disappointed that Reagan had not done more to support the social issues that were near and dear to them, some conservatives thought that the 1988 election was their chance. And Democrats, convinced that Reagan was more personally popular than his programs, believed that the end of his second term would be their chance to retake the White House. Neither challenge succeeded.
In the Republican Party, the conservative but genial Kansas senator Robert Dole challenged the vice president. And Pat Robertson, the extremely conservative religious broadcaster and head of the Christian Broadcasting Network, who had strongly supported Ronald Reagan, now resigned his ordination as a Baptist minister and campaigned for the nomination. Robertson felt that it was time to take the religious right’s social and cultural issues into a presidential campaign. While Bush won the nomination on the first ballot, he embraced many of Dole’s and Robertson’s issues, invited a conservative, Indiana senator J. Danforth Quayle—whom many considered to be a lightweight—to be his running mate, and made a speech he would later regret, telling the Republican convention, “Read my lips. No new taxes.”
Sensing possible victory, many Democrats sought the nomination. Colorado senator Gary Hart, an initial front runner, was forced out of the race after he was photographed on the yacht Monkey Business with the model Donna Rice—not his wife—sitting on his lap. The nomination battle came down to a contest between the Reverend Jesse Jackson, a longtime civil rights leader, and Massachusetts governor Michael Dukakis. Jackson was extremely popular in some circles and reviled in others. He was the first African-American candidate to win presidential primaries in southern states, winning five. But in the end, Dukakis won the Democratic nomination. He summed up his campaign when he told the Democratic convention, “This election is not about ideology, it’s about competence.”
Dukakis entered the fall campaign with a 17-point lead in the polls, a sign that people were ready for a change, but the lead quickly evaporated in what turned into a very nasty battle. Dukakis s focus on competence did not make for an inspiring campaign. 822 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Explore the Reagan Revolution on MyHistoryLab
HOW DID THE "REAGAN REVOLUTION" OF THE
SHAPE AMERICAN POLITICS?
In the presidential election of 1980, Republican Ronald Reagan won a landslide victory over Jimmy Carter. Economic stagnation and foreign policy difficulties had marked the previous years, while Reagan promised smaller government at home and stronger government abroad. In 1984, Reagan won an even more impressive victory over Democratic candidate Walter Mondale. One reason for these landslide victories was that a group of traditionally Democratic voters— white, socially conservative, blue-collar workers—changed party affiliation during the Reagan years and voted Republican. Reagan's supply-side economic policy, which included limited government deregulation and tax breaks for middle class and wealthy Americans, brought economic prosperity, but did not change the duress many suffered as other market forces saw the country move from an Back!
Taking advantage of a troubled economy and national mood, former California governor and actor Ronald Reagan won the elections of 1980 and 1984 for the Republican Party based on the "Bringing America Back" message.
industrial to a service economy. Abroad, the Cold War began to end during Reagan's second administration with the weakening of the Soviet Union and the erosion of communist control in its Warsaw Pact allies.
Presidential Election Electoral Results
1980 Election
Reagan (Republican): Carter (Democrat): 1984 Election Reagan (Republican): Mondale (Democrat).
489 electoral votes 49 electoral votes
525 electoral votes 13 electoral votes
KEY QUESTIONS
Use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions: Cause ►►► How did support for Republican and Democratic presidential candidates change in the elections from 1976-1988?
Chart these trends to consider their causation.
Analysis ►►► Where did the incidence of poverty stay high?
Map the regions where economic difficulties remained prevalent.
Response ►►► How did the Soviet Union's collapse redraw the map of Europe and Central Asia?
Explore the unfolding of the end of the Cold War.
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revolj

American Voices
Jesse Jackson and Pat Robertson—Presidential Candidates, 1988
Pat Robertson was the most conservative candidate to seek the Republican nomination in 1988 and Jesse Jackson the most liberal to seek the Democratic. Both were Baptist ministers. Both lost
to more moderate candidates and endorsed them but each also had a significant impact on their respective party platform. In speeches to their conventions they outlined their own views.
Jesse Jackson, 1988 Democratic National Convention Address	Pat Robertson, 1988 Republican National Convention Address
When 1 look out at this convention, 1 see the face of America: Red, Yellow, Brown, Black, and White. We're all precious in God's sight—the real rainbow coalition....When 1 was a child growing up in Greenville, South Carolina, and grandmamma could not afford a blanket, she didn't complain.. .she took pieces of old doth... sewed them together into a quilt, a thing of beauty and power and culture. Now, Democrats, we must build such a quilt. Farmers, you seek fair prices, and you are right—but you cannot stand alone. Your patch is not big enough. Workers, you fight for fair wages, you are right—but your patch, labor, is not big enough. Women, you seek comparable worth and pay equity... Head Start, and day care and prenatal care on the front side of life, relevant jail care and welfare on the back side of life, you are right— but your patch is not big enough. Students, you seek scholarships, you are right—but your patch is not big enough. Blacks and Hispanics, when we fight for civil rights, we are right—but our patch is not big enough. Gays and lesbians, when you fight against discrimination and a cure for AIDS, you are right—but your patch is not big enough.... But don't despair. Be as wise as my grandmamma. Pull the patches and the pieces together, bound by a common thread. When we form a great quilt of unity and common ground, we'll have the power to bring about health care and housing and jobs and education and hope to our Nation. We, the people, can win.	Four years ago the keynote speaker at the Democratic National Convention told us that America was a tale of two cities—the "haves" and the "have-nots." The rich and the poor. The upper class and the lower class... .The Democrats have given us a clear picture of their city. They offer unlimited government, massive transfers of wealth from the productive sector of society to the nonproductive, and ever-increasing regulation of the daily lives of the people and their children. In the city of the Democratic Party, the liberal mindset reigns supreme. Criminals are turned loose and the innocent are made victims. Disease carriers are protected and the healthy are placed at great risk. In the Democrat's city, welfare dependency flourishes and no one is held accountable for his or her behavior. Society is always to blame. In the Democrat's city, the rights of the majority must always take a back seat to the clamorous demands of the special interest minorities. And yet, in their city it is always the majority that must pay the bills, through higher and higher taxes.... Ladies and Gentlemen, the Republican Party wants to write a tale of another city. We are the children of those who tamed the wilderness, spanned a continent, and brought forth the greatest nation on the face of the earth....We see a city seton a hill. A shining light of freedom for all of the nations to see and admire. A city made great by the moral strength and self-reliance of her people.... We are Republicans, and we believe in government that is our servant, not our master.
Source: Jesse Jackson, 1988 Democratic National Convention Address, downloaded July 26,2011 from www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/jessejackson1988dnc.htm; Pat Robertson, 1988 Republican National Convention Address, downloaded July 26,2011 from www.patrobertson.com/Speeches/PresidentialBidEnded.asp.
Thinking Critically
1. Documentary Analysis
What did each speaker see as the fundamental source of America's strength? What role did each assign government in making that potential strength a reality?
2. Historical Interpretation
What light do these two speeches shed on the fundamental ideological divisions in American politics in the late 1980s and early 1990s?
The comedian Mort Sahl complained that Dukakis was “the only colorless Greek in America. The Bush camp, led by Lee Atwater, ran TV ads featuring a black convicted criminal, Willie Horton, who had killed a man and raped a woman while on furlough from a Massachusetts prison. The fact that many states, including Reagan’s California, had furlough policies did not make a difference. The appeal to fear was strong. In the end, Bush swamped Dukakis by a vote of almost 49 million to 42 million and 426 to 111 electoral votes and won the presidential term he had long sought.
28.1
Quick Review How successfully did Ronald Reagan fulfill his initial goals? How did his goals change during his term in office?
824 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
28.2
THE CHANGING NATURE OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY
Explain international economic developments that shaped the United States.
Presidential candidates, economists, and families who gathered around the dinner table or the TV trays in the living room all debated the nature of the economic changes that were taking place in the 1980s as “Reaganomics” led to tax cuts, a reduction in government services, and fewer government regulations. Late in his term, in July 1987, President Reagan proposed what he called an Economic Bill of Rights, which he restated on several occasions:
First is the freedom to work—to pursue one’s livelihood in one’s own way ... free from excessive government regulation and subsidized government competition;.. .freedom to enjoy the fruits of one’s labor.. .free from excessive government taxing, spending and borrowing by the government.. .the freedom to own and control one’s property....freedom to participate in a free market... and to achieve one’s full potential without government limits on opportunity.
0
o>
c
(0
£
O
*-»
c
0
O
k.
0
o.
It was a philosophy that Reagan seemed to embody in his own life story. Yet by 1987, when the president spoke, some Americans were beginning to have second thoughts.
Kevin Phillips, who helped Republican presidential campaigns from Nixon to Reagan, was among them. In his book, The Boiling Point, he described what he saw as Reagan’s term came to an end. Reagan had been elected in 1980, Phillips said, because government was “fairly in disrepute for its swollen size and record of aggravating rather than solving problems.” He continued that with the cuts in taxes and government programs, however, “[h]igh-income persons did not suffer, but middle-class voters usually worried when federal and state reductions went too far” (see Figure 28-1).
One of the striking features of the economy of the 1980s was the extraordinary fortunes made by a few individuals. In the 1980s, Ivan Boesky anticipated corporate takeovers and mergers, buying stock just before it increased in value with stunning regularity. In December 1986, Boesky was honored with a cover photo in Time magazine, and by 1987, he had earned a total of more than $200 million.
Michael Milken, an investor for the firm Drexel Burnham Lambert who specialized in so-called junk bonds, earned much more. Junk bonds were high-risk investments that could pay high yields. Milken arranged investments in gambling casinos and technology startups as well “leveraged buyouts” in which investors would buy a controlling share of a company—using loans arranged by Milken—and thereby take it over in spite of the will of its owners and managers. In 1987, his estimated income for that one year was $550 million.
Boesky, Milken, and other slightly lesser figures were the heroes of the 1980s. In a speech to business students at the University of California, Berkeley, Boesky said, “I think greed is healthy. You can be greedy and still feel good about yourself. But Kevin Phillips noted that, “By early 1990 The New York Times noted that Wall Street found an unnerving whiff of populism in the public s anger over junk-bond pioneer Michael Milken’s $550-million-a-year salary.
Federal employees at the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) became suspicious that anyone could have as much success as Boesky in guessing the direction of stock values year after year. A SEC investigation showed that Boesky was indeed getting illegal insider information about corporate takeovers and mergers. When he was charged with breaking the law, Boesky implicated Milken, whose illegal dealings were even more complex. Boesky was eventually fined $100 million, half of his fortune, Milken paid over $1.1 billion, and both served almost 2 years in federal prison. In the 1987 movie, Wall Street,
Average Annual Change in Family Income
Lowest
Fifth
Lower- Middle Upper- Highest Middle Fifth Fifth Middle Fifth Fifth
FIGURE 28-1 Real Family Income, 1980-1990. As this chart shows dramatically, between 1980 and 1990, the poorest fifth of American^ much poorer, the middle groups barely held their own, and the top got much more wealthy during the decade.
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revoi
' 1
283
28.2
THINKING HISTORICALLY
A
Changing World Economy 283
Robert Reich was a respected economist in the 1980s and would serve as secretary of labor in the 1990s. As Reagan's term came to a close, Reich looked at the Reagan tax cuts, which he argued had certainly shifted money toward the rich. However, he also said that there were larger forces at work that were reshaping the world's economy and that the real issue was that the United States could not control its economy. In 1991, Reich published The Work of Nations in which he said, "We are living through a transformation that will rearrange the politics and economics of the coming century....There will no longer be national economies, at least as we have come to understand that concept."Trade, finance, indeed the whole job market of the planet, Reich insisted, had become a single worldwide economy in which national policies mattered much less than in the past. "All that will remain rooted within national borders," Reich said, "are the people who comprise a nation."
In the new world, Reich believed, some were going to be much better off and others worse off. He argued that people found themselves in one of three quite different economic categories. Those who were employees in the older industries—auto or steel workers for example—found themselves with declining prospects. Well-paying jobs that had been secure were disappearing as manufacturing moved to other countries. A second group of workers, those who provided direct services—from selling hamburgers to health care workers to teachers—would keep their jobs since such services were hard to export, but would find their futures relatively flat. And finally, in the third category, those Reich called "symbolic analysts" the scientists, inventors, developers, and money managers, would do quite well, indeed better than ever before. For example, Reich noted:
In 1960, the chief executive of one of America's 100 largest nonfinancial corporations earned, on average, $190,000 or about 40 times the wage of his average factory worker. After taxes, the chief executive earned only 12 times the factory worker's wages. By the end of the 1980s, however the
chief executive earned, on average, more than $2 million 93 times the wages of his (rarely her) average factory worker. After taxes, the chief executive's compensation was about 70 times that of the average factory worker.
Clearly the Reagan tax cuts had something to do with the change but not everything.
For Reich, the larger issue was the shift from a national American economy to a unified world economy:
All Americans used to be in roughly the same economic boat. Most rose or fell together, as the corporations in which they were employed, the industries comprising such corporations, and the national economy as whole became more productive—or languished. But national borders no longer define our economic fates. We are now in different boats, one sinking rapidly [the industrial workers], one sinking more slowly [service workers], and the third rising steadily [that of managers and inventors].
In the economy that Reich described, Americans would compete, not with each one another, but with people in the same sort of work around the world. Not everyone agreed with Reich, but it was hard to look at the nation at the end of the 1980s and not conclude that some, indeed, were sinking and others were rising quite spectacularly.
Source: Robert B. Reich, The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st Century Capitalism (New York: Vintage Books, 1991), p. 7 and 208.
Thinking Critically
1.	Comparison
How does Reich's economic analysis compare to either defenders or critics of Reagan's economic policies?
2.	Contextualization
How does Reich help place the changing American economy of the 1980s in an international context?

Kill
the villain Gordon Gekko gave a “greed is good” speech, based on Boesky’s Berkeley talk, which became a symbol of an era.
It was not only a few high flyers who got into trouble in the late 1980s, however. Throughout much of the 1970s, the Down Jones Industrial Average had hovered just under 1,000 (that is, the average value of a share on the list was $1,000; see Chapter 22). In 1980, the average crossed the magic 1,000 line to 1,100, and from there it just kept going up along with public optimism. By 1987, the average was above 2,500. Then in October 1987, the bottom fell out as it had done before. On October 19, known us “Black Monday, the market fell by 508 points, closing below 2,000. The next day, the Federal Reserve Bank, seeking to avoid a repeat of the 1929 crash, responded, pumping millions of dollars into the market. Consumer confidence returned and the market stabilized,
826 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Ml

The stock market crash of October 19, 1987, set off panicked selling as did every stock market crash.
but in one day, American stocks had dropped $500 billion in their value, and many investors lost their savings.
Among the victims of Black Monday was the nation’s savings and loan industry. In 1982, as part of the Reagan efforts to deregulate government, most of the restrictions on savings and loan associations were removed. They were allowed to invest not only in houses and cars, which they had long done, but also in risky oil and gas ventures, real estate developments, and even junk bonds like those sold by Michael Milken. They attracted many more depositors by paying previously unheard of high levels of interest. They made huge fortunes for their executives and investors. But when the stock market, junk bonds, and then housing prices collapsed in the late 1980s, the savings and loan industry found itself in serious trouble with investments that were not worth what they owed to depositors. Some 1,200 of the nation’s 4,000 savings and loans required federal help or went out of business. Since the federal government guaranteed savings and loan deposits as they did bank deposits, the government—and taxpayers—were left with the cost, which came to $500 billion or $2,000 for every American. Further investigations showed that U.S. senators had done special favors for the savings and loan industry and six senators were censured. Savings and loan owners who made fortunes were found to have stolen from their companies. William Crawford, a California official charged with investigating the scandal, said, “The best way to rob a bank is to own one.”
0
Quick Review How did government policies and changes in the worldwide economic structure impact the average American in the 1980s?
CHANGES IN THE REST OF THE COUNTRY
Explain cultural changes in the United States during the 1980s.
On April 5,1985, 3 months after Reagan’s second inauguration, Michael Jackson, the most successful American rock star of the 1980s, joined in a concert, originally planned by Bob Geldof and Midge Ure, Irish and Scottish musicians, to raise funds for famine relief in Africa. The concert was broadcast around the world and raised $44 million in a production which included Jackson, Lionel Richie, Bob Dylan, Ray Charles, Billy Joel, Cyndi Lauper, Bette Midler, Willie Nelson, Paul Simon, Bruce Springsteen, Stevie Wonder, and Tina Turner.
Chapter 28 The Reag.
in 8l
singers Bob Dylan and Harry Belafonte performing at "Live Aid '85" Concert on July 13,1985, at J.F.K. Stadium in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Three months later, on July 13, 1985, some 100,000 people attended one of two simultaneous rock concerts held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and London, England. Another 1.5 to 1.9 billion people around the world watched the concerts on TV or listened on radio. At the July concert, Jackson, his guests, and an audience of many million sang We Are the World.
These Live Aid concerts eventually raised over $80 million for Africa. Subsequent concerts raised more money. They also symbolized new international connections. Without a time lag, people could listen to the same concert at the same time. They could also transfer money, hold meetings, and plan new enterprises, creating a worldwide culture and economy. Given the speed of travel, it did not take much longer for people to visit new places, transmit diseases, or start a new life halfway around the world. Popular Culture—Music, Television, Theater
In addition to the fundraising—which was badly needed—the 1985 concerts also symbolized the way American rock musicians had come to dominate the world. Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen, and Cyndi Lauper first emerged in the 1970s and 1980s. They were joined in these concerts by others, Ray Charles, Bob Dylan, and Tina Turner, some of whom had been international figures since the 1950s. They represented diverse musical styles from Turners start in rhythm-and-blues to Charles’s jazz, to Lauper s rock, but all had become cultural icons across the United States, in major world capitals, and in isolated rural villages in Asia, Africa, and tiny Pacific islands.
The popularity of American music and American musicians was made possible, in part, by rapidly changing technologies. Michael Jackson insisted that We Are the World be released at exactly 3:50 p.m. Greenwich Mean Time (10:50 a.m. on the East Coast of the United States) in 8,000 radio stations around the world. The technology to transmit the music to all of these stations was new. When the Live Aid concerts were held in July 1985, one of the musicians, Phil Collins, managed to perform in person at both the London and the Philadelphia concerts thanks to the supersonic concord plane that brought him across the Atlantic faster than the speed of sound. Music Television (MTV) began broadcasting in August 1981 and built a worldwide audience for rock music. Generating these huge audiences would not have happened without the nonstop broadcasting of music videos aimed at audiences in the 12- to 34-year-old demographic who made up the bulk of those who attended the concerts or listened to the broadcasts. And after We Are the World had been released, it and
828 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
other music from the concerts was listened to over and over by individuals using Sony Walkman personal stereos, first sold in 1979, or Sony compact disc (CD) players, which produced far better quality than older tapes and records. American music of the 1980s could be heard worldwide because American—and Japanese—technology made possible the easy and cheap distribution of quality musical sounds.
The music of the 1980s also connected with Americans, especially young Americans, and their counterparts around the globe. It was their generation’s challenge to the traditional culture and its music. Where jazz, rock, and folk music all began as protests, against musical and political systems, so the music of the 1980s was its own forms of protest. African-American artists dominated the music, but they were not alone. Tina Turner, an African-American, who with her husband had headlined the Ike and Tina Turner Revue in the 1950s and 1960s, emerged after her divorce as a force in her own right in the 1980s, celebrating her energy and her sexuality with recordings like Private Dancer in 1984. A younger white woman, Madonna, celebrated her sometimes off-the-wall sexuality in releases like her 1984 album, Like a Virgin. A new generation, the children of the baby boomers, was creating a new music and a new culture of its own in the 1980s and making sure that its country, and the world, listened.
The 1980s were one of the most successful decades in the history of the film industry. The most popular film of the decade was E.T., the Extra-Terrestrial, a story produced by Steven Spielberg about a small creature from outer space who liked candy and wanted to “phone home.” Other highly successful films of the decade included The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Return of the Jedi (1983) in George Lucas’s Star Wars trilogy; Batman', Ghostbusters; and the Indiana Jones movies, Raiders of the Lost Ark (all in 1981) and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989). There were also more violent movies such as Terminator (1984) with Arnold Schwarzenegger and the Rambo films with Sylvester Stallone. While both Schwarzenegger and Stallone played classic “good guys,” the films had plenty of blood and violence. Spike Lee directed films like Do the Right Thing, which explored serious issues in a thoughtful way. Martin Scorsese’s The Last Temptation of Christ, released in 1988, generated critical acclaim but also demonstrations in front of theaters, with its portrayal of Jesus as a man with ordinary temptations. As with music, so with films, technology expanded beyond anything previously thought possible. People still watched movies in theatres, but they also watched them at home as VCRs made it possible for films to be distributed, not only to the local theatre but also to the local living room where people could watch at their leisure.
The most successful TV series of the 1980s, the Bill Cosby Show, reflected an updated version of the 1950s family shows. But the family in the Cosby show, the Huxtables, was led by an African-American doctor, played by Cosby. The focus on a successful African-American family in the mainstream of America, and their warm acceptance by viewers, was a clear shift. In contrast, when the lead character of Murphy Brown, played by Candice Bergen, had a child without being married and indicated that the father’s identity was not important, the vice president of the United States, Dan Quayle, criticized the show.
African-American artists and writers also came to play a dominant role in theater and literature in the 1980s. The playwright August Wilson began producing a series of plays that explored the black experience from 1900 to 2000, including Ma Rainey s Black Bottom in 1985 and Fences in 1986. Toni Morrison’s novel, Beloved, published in 1987, explored the evils of slavery and eventually won the Nobel Prize for Literature.
Culture Wars—The Christian Coalition and Other Critics
The cultural developments of the 1980s and 1990s in music, drama, and creative writing also produced a considerable critical response. Looking at the era, Robert Bork, a conservative legal scholar who had been denied a position on the Supreme Court by a Senate vote in 1987, published Slouching Toward Gomorrah in 1996 in which he blamed a decline he saw in American culture on the nation’s “enfeebled hedonistic
28J
! ?§ j
28.3
Chapter 28 The Reagan
8:
28,1
282
28.3
culture,” its “uninhibited display of sexuality,” and “popularization of violence. Many other authors, liberal and conservative, worried about what the liberal African-American journalist Carl Rowen called the “sexual rot and gratuitous violence that led to “decadence, decay, and self-destruction” in the United States. In 1985, Tipper Gore, whose husband was then Democratic Senator from Tennessee, co-founded the Parents Music Resource Center after hearing her 11-year-old daughter listen to music by the recording artist Prince that she deemed profane.
The religious right was made up of people who were increasingly angry at many of the cultural trends of the 1980s and 1990s. The Moral Majority, the major political organization of the religious right, declined in the late 1980s and disbanded in 1989 (see Chapter 27). It had fallen victim to some of the more extremist statements of its founder Jerry Falwell as well as institutional mismanagement. Some commentators thought that decline would be the end of religious conservatism as a political force. They could not have been more mistaken. After Pat Robertson lost his campaign for the Republican nomination in 1988, he helped launch a new conservative religious
Opposition to abortion became one of the major rallying cries of the growing religious right.
830 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
and political organization: the Christian Coalition.
While launching the Christian Coalition, Robertson hired a young veteran of the
College Republican National Committee, Ralph Reed, to run the organization on a day-to-day basis. Reed brought a steady hand as well as organizational and fundraising skills to the Christian Coalition that the Moral Majority never had. He was a young fresh face and managed to portray himself as a moderating influence on the more extreme Robertson.
Pat Robertson was born in 1930. His father was a conservative Democratic U.S. senator from Virginia from 1946 to 1966. Robertson earned a law degree from Yale before studying for the Baptist ministry. He founded the Christian Broadcasting Network and The 700 Club, a religious talk show that reached millions, before he began his more overt political campaigning. In running for president and then launching the Christian Coalition, Robertson sought to resist what he saw as the increased secularization of American culture and avert what he saw as God’s coming judgment on the nation’s sins. Another evangelical minister, describing Robertson’s supporters, said, “They have a bunker mentality. They feel modernity is against them—in matters dealing with sex, crime, pornography, education.”
Ralph Reed, born in 1961, was a generation younger than Robertson. As a student, he was fascinated with the mechanics of politics and initially put off by the religious right because of their amateurishness. He was determined that the Christian Coalition would be an effective organization. The two made a strong team. By 1992, the Christian Coalition had more than 150,000 members and controlled the grass-roots Republican Party in several southern states.
By the mid-1990s, every Republican candidate for president was courting the Christian Coalition and Reed could say, “We have gained what we have always sought, a place at the table, a sense of legitimacy.” His goal was more than legitimacy, however. Read and Robertson wanted to shape the nation’s political agenda, from the grass roots up as much as from the top down. Pat Buchanan, who served as an advisor to Reagan in the 1980s and sought the Republican nomination in the 1990s, told Reed, “You just keep working on those school board races and leave the presidency to me.” Buchanan never won a presidential nomination, but Reed told the National Press Club “There are an estimated 2,000 religious conservatives who now serve on school boards, city councils, state legislatures, and in Congress.” Their impact throughout the 1990s testified to the coalition’s power.
Religious conservatives were not the only critics of American culture in the 1980s and 1990s. Robert Bellah, a liberal sociologist, argued in his 1986 book Habit of the Heart that Americans were becoming so individualistic and consumption oriented that they were losing their ability to
work together for the common good. A decade later in 1995, a Harvard scholar, Robert Putnam, published Bowling Alone in which he explored the impact of individualism. Americans who, in the past, joined churches, social and service organizations, and bowling leagues, now stayed home to watch television, spent less time in face-to-face gatherings of any sort, and even if they went out to a bowling alley, now did it alone. Some critics thought that Putnam and Bellah romanticized the past, but few dismissed their worries. New Immigrants, New Diversities
In the 1980s and 1990s many who lived in the United States were very recent arrivals. In 2000, 28.4 million people, or 10.4 percent of the population of the United States, were foreign born. This increase was a significant change from the 4.7 percent who were foreign born in 1970 and marked the end of almost 50 years of very tough immigration restrictions. Immigrants they came in growing numbers in every decade. When Congress passed and Lyndon Johnson signed the Immigration and Nationality (Hart-Cellar) Act in 1965, no one expected it to have a major impact on the overall numbers of people coming to the United States (see Chapter 21). They could not have been more wrong. The 1965 law capped the number of immigrants at the same place as the older law, however, it was designed to make the process fairer. In addition to the numerical limits in the 1965 law, it provided for family reunion. If one member of a family was a legal resident or citizen of the United States, then that member could bring his or her family, regardless of the caps. By the 1990s, two-thirds of all immigrants to the United States were coming as part of family reunions.
Official government numbers showed the impact of the changes brought about by the law:
4.5 million immigrants in the 1970s
7.3 million immigrants in the 1980s
9.1 million immigrants in the 1990s
In addition, by most estimates, between 250,000 and 350,000 came to the United States every year without official documentation. In 2000, the U.S. population stood at 281 million, including some 28 million who had come between 1970 and 2000—more individuals than at any other 30-year time span in the nation’s history.
The new immigrants who came between 1970 and 2000 also came from places different from immigrants of earlier eras. Before 1924, when the United States virtually closed its doors to immigrants (see Chapter 26), most immigrants had come from Europe and, unwillingly, from Africa. After 1980, most new immigrants came from Latin America and Asia. Between 1980 and 2000,
2 million people came to the United States from Europe (mostly from former Soviet states);
5.7	million people came from Asia;
4 million people came from Mexico;
2.8	million people came from other parts of Central America, and the Caribbean;
1 million came from South America;
600,000 came from Africa; and
250,000 came from Canada.
By any counting they were reshaping the country.
Immigrants moved to every part of the United States. Meatpacking plants in Kansas, potato farms in Maine, and agribusiness in southern Indiana all depended on recent immigrants who were willing to do hot, dirty, and generally low-paying work. The majority of immigrants, however, settled in relatively few areas, especially the states of California, Texas, Florida, New Jersey, Illinois, and New York. By 2000, California’s population was 27 percent foreign-born as a result of a major influx of new immigrants and a modest white exodus.
28.1
28.2
283
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revolution
28.1
28.2
28.1
The sign at this vigil in Echo Park, Los Angeles, reads, "This fruit is the product of immigrants' labor." Members of the city's Latino community bless fruit baskets as they protest a state crack down on illegal immigration and the increase of border patrol guards.
Many immigrants also came to the United States without official approval. The borders with Mexico and Canada were hard to guard and many simply walked across. Others came on tourist visas and never left. In 1986, Congress passed legislation that President Reagan signed, giving anyone who had been in the United States since 1982 the right to seek amnesty, and 1.7 million people, most from Mexico, took advantage of the law.
Debates about immigration became intense. In campaigning for the Republican presidential nomination in 1992, Patrick Buchanan staked out the anti-immigrant views in the strongest terms. He said, “Our own country is undergoing the greatest invasion in its history, a migration of millions of illegal aliens yearly from Mexico... .A nation that cannot control its own borders can scarcely call itself a state any longer.” In 1986, almost three-quarters of California voters approved a law that made English the “official language” of the state. While the law had little formal meaning, it was a slap at those who spoke other languages. Some labor union leaders and workers, white and black, complained that new immigrants were taking their jobs or depressing wages in whole industries.
On the other hand, defenders of immigration argued that the American economy was dependent on immigrants who were willing to take jobs—in restaurants, agriculture, and home health care—that few native-born Americans were willing to do. Would the crops get harvested, the meat packaged, the dishes washed, and the elderly cared for if immigrants, documented and undocumented, were forced to leave? Immigrants are generally younger than the average population, pay taxes, and contribute to the Social Security system, though in the case of those who are undocumented, they may never collect benefits. Some studies, they argued, indicate that immigrants are more highly educated, more likely to be in stable families, and less likely to be engaged in crime, though other scholars disputed those numbers. While the arguments continued, people kept coming.
American Indians in the 1980s—Casinos and Rebirth
While their numbers were drastically reduced by war and disease, American Indian tribes have survived and sometimes thrived in spite of the difficulties. As restrictions on teaching American Indian languages, culture, and religion were lifted in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, a surprising reservoir of an earlier cultural heritage resurfaced. For
832 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
American Voices
Caridad Rios, Adela Aguirre, and Sasa Savic Talk about Their Immigrant Experiences in the United States
o single immigrant experience stands for the hundreds of thousands of people who have moved from crisis, poverty, or war to make new lives in the United States. These brief interviews with Caridad Rios, a 40-year-old native of Lake Chapala, Jalisco, Mexico; Adela Aguirre, also from Mexico; and Sasa Savic from the former Yugoslavia describe some common experiences.
Caridad Rios: I don't believe I'll ever return to my country, because of them [her children]. Because how could I leave them? For better or worse they need their mother here, even if they're grown...This country is made up of immigrants. From the earliest times, immigrants came....This country belongs to the whole world....I have worked, now I am receiving food stamps, but who cares? I have worked, I have contributed here.
Adela Aguirre [speaking of Chinese immigrant women at the workshop she attended] The first time...that I began to notice, that I said that yes, they also feel bad, they also have problems. They also go through what I'm going through, so Adela, what are you complaining about? Yes. That was when I began to get more interested in everything. It was when I began to pay more attention to them. Because I said, I have to learn from them. I have to learn a lot from all my companeras, but even more from them [the Chinese women]. First of all, because they are another, they are another nationality, they have other customs, they have another language. And maybe the nicest thing they made me learn was just that, that I realized that there are people, of whatever origin or whatever nationality that will help you, will motivate you.
Sasa Savic Basically I was raised in a middle-class family in the former Yugoslavia. My father was an officer in the army. So when I finished high school I served in the army, because it was mandatory for everybody to serve for 1 year. So I did that and coming out of the army there was a lot of political problems in the country. The country was in turmoil; everybody wanted to separate from each other. So since I'm from a mixed marriage—my father is Serbian and my mother Croatian—it was impossible to choose a side and say,'okay, I want to fight in the Serbian army against Croatians or the Croatian army against Serbian. So we decided to elope; my girlfriend at the time and I decided to get married and to try to come to this country. It was very hard to get a visa at the time....Because we said we wanted to go there on our honeymoon, we were granted a visitor visa.
Source: Kathleen M. Coll, Remaking Citizenship: Latina Immigrants & New American Politics (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2010); Katherine Hanson, Dream A New World (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, forthcoming).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What challenges and opportunities did these three immigrants associate with living in the United States?
2.	Craft an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement:The essential motives, experiences, and expectations of immigrants to the United States have changed very little over the centuries.
IB

some tribes, Coyote is the perfect symbol of Indian life. Coyote is the trickster who disappears and reappears as he needs to in order to survive and thrive in new contexts. At the Spirit Mountain Casino, which is operated by the Grand Ronde Reservation in western Oregon State, a picture of Coyote dominates the gambling hall and the tribal logo. It is a fitting symbol.
Gambling transformed many American Indian communities in the 1980s. While often a subject of derision, gambling brought prosperity to many tribes that had experienced only poverty since their first engagement with Europeans. Two federal court cases, Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Butterworth in 1981 and Californio v. Cabazon Band of Mission Indians in 1987, made it difficult for states to limit gambling on Indian reservations. Some of those who controlled the gambling industry did not like the idea of new competitors, and Donald Trump complained about “equal treatment under the law.” But the United States had always used a different set of laws for Indians, and treaty rights created a unique situation. In the court cases, tribes and their attorneys argued that the treaty rights creating the reservations gave them all the powers of any sovereign state to handle their own affairs. To regularize the new industry that was emerging, Congress passed the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA) in 1988, and Reagan signed it. While the court cases and legislation did not give the tribes unlimited control over their own affairs, a new industry was born, one that brought prosperity to some, though not to others.
283
By 1994,72 tribes were operating gambling operations in half of the states, and many more were planned. The gross income of these operations, $1.5 billion, was only a tiny fraction of the $330 billion the Americans spent on gambling, but it was a huge new source of income for tribes that had existed for generations on the economic margins.
The Pequots Foxwoods Casino produced almost $900 million in 1994, and the tribal council used the money to create other job-producing enterprises, including a silica mine and a printing plant. They bought the former Electric Boat shipyard that helped maintain the U.S. nuclear submarine fleet. Their goal was long-term economic development that was not dependent only on the gambling industry. Other tribes did the same. The Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin used the income from its slot-machine complex near Green Bay to open a chain store and a high-tech research and development firm. The Choctaws of Oklahoma used income from a bingo parlor in Durant to build a manufacturing plant, hotels, and the Choctaw Nation Travel Plaza that earned $1.4 million per month in 1992.
The new wealth allowed tribes to design their own museums, support retention of tribal languages, and maintain aspects of their culture that were otherwise being lost. They also allowed tribes to expand schools, provide new job training programs and health services, and generally support their members at a higher level. Promises of wealth also led some to “rediscover” their Indian identity. Indians who had drifted away from reservations were now returning, a change since the 1950s when a government Urban Relocation Program had led perhaps half of all American Indians to move from reservations to cities. Others who were part Indian were now claiming their Indian ties. Determining who was, and was not, a member of a specific tribe became a complex issue for some. R. David Edmunds, an ethnohistorian who himself is part Cherokee, wrote that traditionally no one questioned tribal membership, “If the Shawnees said you were Shawnee, you were Shawnee.” By the 1990s, however, such issues had become more complex, and tribes sometimes had to make difficult decisions. Nevertheless, the new prosperity was significant.
AIDS and the Gay Community
In 1980, Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) was an unknown disease. In June 1981, the Center for Disease Control (CDC), the U.S. government’s key agency for monitoring the spread of disease, reported AIDS for the first time. Later studies found that AIDS may have infected people in the United States as early as 1969, but only in the 1980s did Americans learn about what would quickly become a terrible new scourge, first identified among gay men.
By May 1982, the New York Times carried a story, “New homosexual disorder worries officials.” At first, health officials did not know what the disease was. They were starting to discover that a cluster of symptoms were appearing in certain groups of people, especially homosexual men and intravenous drug users, but it took some time to understand what was happening. The symptoms were terrible: tumors, breathing difficulty, difficult digestion, and eventually, death. By 1984, researchers discovered the infectious agent, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and understood that they were not dealing with a few isolated cases but, rather, a growing worldwide pandemic. In 1985, the CDC recorded 5,600 deaths from AIDS. Three years later, 61,816 died of AIDS. By then, researchers had also concluded that HIV was spread through contact with bodily fluids, especially but not exclusively through sex or through sharing needles or even blood transfusions that brought the blood of an infected person into contact with another. People with many sexual partners and people who routinely shared needles were especially susceptible. HIV, they also concluded, could not be spread by a hug, by touching the same material, or through the air, but many people panicked and would not come near anyone suspected of carrying the disease.
As HIV-AIDS spread—the CDC confirmed 98,835 cases by 1988—the famous and the unknown were afflicted. The actor Rock Hudson, who often played tough
834 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
heterosexual male roles but was gay, announced in July 1985 that he had been suffering from AIDS since 1984. Many, including Hudson’s good friend Ronald Reagan, were stunned. Hudson died in 1985. Arthur Ashe, a famous tennis star, announced in April 1992 that he had contracted AIDS through a blood transfusion in the mid-1980s and he died in February 1993. In 1987, a previously unknown teenager, Ryan White, became a national voice for AIDS victims. White, who suffered from hemophilia, had contracted AIDS from blood treatments, but was then ostracized and expelled from school in his hometown of Kokomo, Indiana. He died in April 1990. White’s gentle personality made him a hero. In addition to White, Ashe, and Hudson, thousands of other Americans were suffering and dying. In some communities with large groups of gay men, especially San Francisco’s Castro district and New York City’s Greenwich Village, it seemed as if a whole community was dying, and those who survived spent their time caring for the sick and attending funerals.
As people understood more about the disease, they also turned to the federal government for action. The government could not stop AIDS, but it could fund research that might lead to treatment and cure. The government could also spread information more effectively than any other agency, especially as it became known that using condoms during sex resulted in significantly safer, if not completely safe, sex and that using sterilized needles and not sharing them offered significant protection for drug users. But the call for government action crashed into the ideology of many of the leading players in the Reagan administration. The president’s director of communications, Patrick Buchanan, had once said, “The poor homosexuals. They have declared war on nature and now nature is exacting an awful retribution.” Other Reagan supporters, including Secretary of Education William Bennett, may not have agreed with Buchanan, but they strongly opposed supporting condom use. Requests by scientists at the CDC for more research funds were routinely denied.
When the U.S. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, himself very conservative on matters of sex education, decided that it was his duty to get information out to the public on the dangers of AIDS and how to reduce those dangers, he said he realized, “I would have to skate fast on thin ice to get by political appointees who placed conservative ideology over saving lives.” After Koop issued his first report, members of the Domestic Policy Council suggested “revisions” that Koop believed would undermine its effectiveness. Only in 1987 did Reagan speak publically about AIDS for the first time. Breaking a silence that had irritated many, including Nancy Reagan, the president called AIDS “public enemy Number One,” but he continued to refuse to acknowledge or meet Ryan White or mention condoms until after he left office in 1989.
Gay activists became increasingly militant. In the fall of 1987, ACT-UP (AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power) staged a massive demonstration of 500,000 people in New York City. In addition, ACT-UP and other organizations, including the American Foundation for AIDS Research, continued to lobby for better public education, which in the 1990s was very effective. Eventually in 1992, Congress appropriated approximately $2 billion for AIDS research. While no cure or medical prevention has yet been discovered, important advances in the treatment of AIDS came as a result. AIDS had once been a death sentence, but by 2000, many with AIDS were living long and full lives as long as they continued to monitor their treatments carefully. In combining issues of medical science, health, sexuality, and drug use, the AIDS epidemic illustrated a tangle of cultural issues facing the nation as it entered the 1990s.
MBHMKHHHK
Across the country, gay and lesbian organizations, especially ACT-UP shown here, demonstrated to demand more funding for research into the causes and cures for AIDS as well as support for immediate help to AIDS victims.
283
Quick Review How did cultural—and technological—changes in the United States in the 1980 impact each other and government policy?
Chapter 28 The Reagan Revolutia
CONCLUSION
The Reagan Revolution began in 1980 when Ronald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter in his presidential bid for reelection. Reagan, supported by a broad coalition of working-class whites, suburbanites, and social conservatives, came to office with three key priorities: increase military spending, cut domestic spending and social programs, and cut the federal income tax. During the Reagan administration, all three goals were met, and both political parties, the Republicans and the Democrats, became more conservative. Many New Deal structures and programs were eliminated or drastically modified, and the combination of tax cuts and military spending increased the national debt significantly.
Reagan and his advisors rejected the idea that federal spending was the best way to stimulate a sluggish economy. Instead, they sought to foster private investment and create new jobs by cutting taxes. Relying on what they called supply-side economics, Reagan drastically reduced both taxes and domestic expenditures. Reagan’s initiatives, at first, did very little to improve the nation’s economy. During his first term, unemployment, inflation, and the national debt all rose steadily. But, by 1983, the economy, in the eyes of most Americans, was improving. Although the stock market was strong throughout much of Reagan’s presidency, the bottom fell out in 1987. By the late 1980s, several economic events, including the savings and loan crisis, suggested that the U.S. economy was in trouble again.
Reagan came to office with very little foreign policy experience, but he quickly focused on destabilizing existing Communist governments and acted to prevent the spread of communism, especially in Latin America. As a result, the United States intervened in both overt and covert ways in many countries in the Middle East and Latin America. Later in his administration, the efforts to build new contacts within Iran and to fund the opposition to the Nicaraguan government led to what was known as the Iran-Contra scandal that seriously undermined the administration’s credibility and foreign policy record. As part of his anticommunism agenda, Reagan also initiated the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), or Star Wars, with the intention of destroying any Soviet missiles in space before they could strike the United States. While SDI greatly troubled the Soviets, it was never a viable technology, and despite his hardline stance against communism, Reagan forged a diplomatic relationship with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Before he left office, Reagan and Gorbachev had essentially brought the 40-year-long Cold War to an end.
In the 1980s, the culture wars began to dominate American politics as technological changes brought the world closer together and new forms of music and entertainment dominated the culture. At the same time, the Christian Coalition gained increasing power and influence. The religious conservatives of the Christian Coalition were alarmed by liberalizing cultural trends and by the ways that immigration was transforming the country. By the end of the decade, the country had been rocked by the AIDS epidemic, which some tried to ignore but which was, indeed, one of the great public health crises in history.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did American culture and politics change during the 1980s with the advent of the Reagan Revolution and so many other changes at the same time?
836 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Chapter 28 Chapter Review
28.1
A RAPIDLY CHANGING U.S. GOVERNMENT
Explain Reagan's impact on the United States and the world.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
Why did working-class whites, in both the North and the South, throw their support behind Reagan in the 1980 and 1984 elections?
2.	Cause and Effect
What were Reagan’s domestic priorities and how did their implementation impact the economy and the federal government?
3.	Construct an Argument
In your opinion, should Ronald Reagan be given credit for ending the Cold War? Why or why not?
4.	Historical Interpretation
What major trends in American politics were reflected in the results of the 1988 presidential election?
THE CHANGING NATURE OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY
Explain international economic developments that shaped the United States.
Review Questions
5.	Historical Interpretation
What connections can you make between the financial scandals of the 1980s and larger trends in American economic history?
28.2
6.	Construct an Argument
In your opinion, was the net impact of Reagan’s economic policies positive or negative? What evidence can you present to support your position?
CHANGES IN THE REST OF THE COUNTRY
283
Explain cultural changes in the United States during the 1980s.
Review Questions
7.	Cause and Effect
What role did technology play in the spread of American popular culture around the world in the 1980s?
8.	Historical Interpretation
How and why did the Christian Coalition become a major political force in the 1990s?
9.	Comparison
Compare and contrast immigration to the United States in 1900 and 2000. How would you account for the differences you note?
Chapter 28
The Reagan
isiiaaBiiaiiisiiiiiiiiissii
Bill Clinton, here surrounded by an enthusiastic crowd of supporters, was enormously effective as a political campaigner.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the changes in the United States as the threat of communism ended, new foreign problems arose, and new economic and technological issues shaped the country.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION,
1989-1993 Explain the New World Order that George Bush described.
THE CLINTON PRESIDENCY
Analyze the impact of the Clinton presidency and the Clinton-Gingrich conflict on the country.
TECHNOLOGY DOMINATES AN ERA
Analyze the changes in technology and their impact on U.S. culture.
On Inauguration Day, January 20, 1989, as Ronald Reagan left the White House, the nation was prosperous, his loyal vice president was replacing him, and perhaps even more significant, the long Cold War with the Soviet Union seemed to be coming to an end. George H.W. Bush would lead the nation in a very different international context than any predecessor since World War II. In April 1989, just after Bush’s inauguration, the Communist government of Poland, with Gorbachev’s permission, legalized the prodemocracy Solidarity and agreed to free elections. In June, for the first time in history, a Communist government was voted out of office and yielded power peacefully to its non-Communist successor. That fall, Hungary followed the same course and ousted its Communist government. Demonstrations in East Germany led to a change in leadership, and on November 9, the Berlin Wall that had divided the city, and Europe, for almost 30 years came down. With the fall of the Berlin Wall, Berliners who had never met each other embraced and celebrated. Leaders of East and West Germany talked of unification, which came 2 years later. In December, Czechoslovakia inaugurated a non-Communist government.
What had begun as a conversation between two leaders in a house in Iceland in 1986 had become, by 1989, what the new president called “a new world order.” The end of the Cold War drastically changed U.S. foreign policy, and allowed
838 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Significant Dates
At the Berlin Wall, which had divided the city for almost 30 years, people from east and west greeted each other and celebrated a new freedom.
1989
1991
1993
29.1
29.1
people to see the world differently. Tracing the changes in U.S. foreign policy and politics in the post-Cold War world as well as the domestic changes, especially those brought about by technology in the decade after the Cold War ended, is the focus of this chapter.
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION,
1989-1993__________________________________________ 1994 Explain the New World Order that George Bush described.
Few people came to the White House as well-prepared to manage the rapid changes in the international situation as George H.W. Bush. As a former U.S. Ambassador to China, former head of the CIA, and former vice president, he knew the key players and understood the context of events as well as anyone. Unlike his predecessor, Bush came to office with a 1996 prime interest in foreign policy. It was an expertise that might serve him well in the rapidly changing world of the 1990s. The United States was also changing, economically and technologically, but President Bush was less prepared to deal with some of the rapid domestic changes that were taking place, which in the end cost him a second term in office.	1998
Foreign Policy Between 1989 and 1993
Bush and his foreign policy team—Secretary of State James Baker, Secretary of Defense Richard Cheney, National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft (a retired Air Force general), and Joint Chiefs of Staff Chair General Colin Powell—were initially skeptical of the agreements by which Reagan and Gorbachev had sought to end the Cold War, and 1999 they did not propose to reduce defense spending. However, the pace of international developments only accelerated after Bush took office. Bush maintained a hands-off policy toward the dissolution of Soviet control in Eastern Europe. He said that the United 2000 States did not want to “poke a stick in the eyes of Mr. Gorbachev. But he insisted, in spite of pleas by Gorbachev and European leaders, that Germany had the right to be united and that the new nation should be part of NATO. Bush showed less inclination to state a position when Lithuania declared independence in March 1990, leaving it to the Lithuanians and the Soviets to work out the terms of their own agreement.
Chinese tanks crush Tiananmen Square
protests leading to U.S. sanctions on China , *	-
First free elections in Poland lead to Solidarity, winning and creating a non-
Communist government	____ _____
Education Summit of national governors
J
Berlin Wall falls
Velvet Revolution in Czechoslovakia
Marines land in Panama to oust
Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega
Operation Desert Storm restores Kuwait's
independence
Rodney King beaten by Los Angeles police
Clarence Thomas confirmed on the
Supreme Court
East and West Germany unified
Soviet Union disbands
Waco, Texas, assault and suicide kills 80
Military "don't ask, don't tell" policy begins
Oslo Accords between Israel and PLO
announced at White House
U.S. troops attacked in Somalia
NAFTA
Treaty approved by Congress and signed by Clinton
Republican Contract with America
announced
Newt Gingrich elected Speaker of the
House, first Republican in the position
since 1955
Oklahoma City federal building bombed
Dayton Peace Accords for Bosnia
Clinton's "end welfare as we know it"
legislation (Welfare Reform Act) passes
Clinton reelected, defeating Republican
Robert Dole
Washington Post announces Clinton
affair with Monica Lewinsky
Osama bin Laden announces Holy War
against United States
Google founded
House votes to impeach President Clinton
Senate acquits Clinton of all charges
Two gunmen at Columbine, Colorado,
highschool kill 13
The world survives the Y2K scare
Beginning of dot-com bust
George W. Bush inaugurated as president^^H^^L after contested election against Al Gore Napster system for sharing music goes
Chapter 29 A New World On
While Gorbachev and Bush got to know each other, Gorbachev s own hold on power weakened. Hardliners within the Kremlin blamed Gorbachev for weak leadership as Soviet control of eastern Europe ended. In August 1991, old-line communists staged a military coup and arrested Gorbachev. Boris Yeltsin, the president of the Russian Republic, the largest and most powerful of the 15 Soviet Republics that made up the Soviet Union (or Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the U.S.S.R.), helped defeat the coup leaders, and Gorbachev was freed and restored to power within days. However, the restoration was short-lived. In December 1991, Gorbachev announced that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (the Soviet Union), which had governed Russia and its neighbors since 1917, was no more. Russia, the Ukraine, and Belarus created an informal Confederation of Independent States. Other former Soviet Republics savored their independence. Gorbachev’s position simply disappeared. At the Kremlin, the red hammer and sickle flag was replaced with the blue flag of the Russian Republic. The prime enemy of the United States through 45 years of Cold War was gone. While relations with Russia and the other former Soviet republics would be difficult at times, they took place in a vastly different world, (see Map 29-1).
MAP 29-1 Europe After Communism. The map of Europe was radically rearranged after the Soviet Union broke apart into independent republics and the nations of eastern Europe claimed their independence from Russian domination.
840 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
While Eastern Europe went through its dramatic changes, the other Communist giant, China, was also changing. As a former ambassador to China, Bush thought he knew the country well and wanted to build closer ties. But he was taken by complete surprise in the spring of 1989, when Chinese students gathered in Tiananmen Square in the heart of China s capital, Beijing, to protest the communist party’s tight hold and to demand more democratic governance and greater individual freedom. Such protests were unheard of in Communist China. By May, as protests had spread to 200 other Chinese cities, the government declared martial law, and then in June sent tanks and army units into Tiananmen Square, killing perhaps 3,000 students and injuring three times as many. The communist government of China was not about to follow Russia’s peaceful transition to a different social system. The world, including President Bush, was horrified. For the rest of his term, Bush was torn about whether to join other nations in protest, seek to maintain and expand commercial ties with China, and respond to protests by members of Congress and the 43,000 Chinese students who were in the United States. The result was an unclear and inconsistent China policy.
In August 1990, the Bush foreign policy team was confronted by another surprising crisis in yet another part of the world. On August 1, Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein ordered an attack on Iraq’s smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and quickly took control of the country. Kuwait had been part of Iraq until 1961, and Hussein insisted he was simply reuniting what should never have been divided. U.S. ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, had told Hussein that the United States had “no opinion,” on Iraq’s border dispute with Kuwait, but she never meant that statement to mean the United States would allow Iraq to swallow its neighbor. Both Iraq and Kuwait were among the world’s largest oil producers, and Iraqi control of Kuwait meant that an Iraqi dictator, whom the United States did not trust, was in control of 20 percent of the world’s oil.
Tiananmen Square
Prodemocracy demonstrations involving thousands of young Chinese students.
w
ELCOME TO KUWAIT



^XXZearly !991, U.S. troops landed In Kuwait and quickly secured its independence from Iraq.
Chapter 29 A New World Ordj
29.1
Operation Desert Storm
Code name for the successful offensive against Iraq by the United States and its allies in the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
Agreement reached in 1993 by Canada, Mexico, and the United States to substantially reduce barriers to trade.
Bush announced, “This will not stand.” The United States negotiated with Hussein but quickly began military planning if negotiations failed. Bush gained the support of Syria, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia in insisting that Iraq must leave Kuwait. In November, the UN Security Council authorized the use of force if negotiations did not succeed. While there was significant opposition in the United States to any intervention, Congress authorized the use of force, though in the Senate the vote was a close 52-47.
On January 17, 1991, the U.S.-led Operation Desert Storm began. An air war showered missiles and bombs on the Iraqi forces in Kuwait and destroyed communications and electrical systems in Iraq. On February 24, U.S. Marines from bases in Saudi Arabia landed in Kuwait and in 100 hours of battle drove the Iraqi forces out of the country. Kuwait was reestablished as an independent country and a close U.S. ally. Fearing unnecessary carnage and not wanting a U.S. occupation of Iraq proper, Bush then halted all military operations. The war was over. It seemed an easy military victory, but it was not without costs.
Within Iraq, rebellions broke out against Hussein’s rule. While Bush hoped they would succeed, he was not willing to intervene or to try to topple Hussein, fearing that the United States would be caught in a long-term land war in Iraq. He did, however, take action to protect the Kurdish minority in a new autonomous region within northern Iraq, announcing a “no fly zone” in which the United States would shoot down any Iraqi planes over that area, but opposition forces in the rest of the country, expecting U.S. aid that never came, were slaughtered by Hussein’s troops. A U.S. boycott of Iraq led to widespread suffering within the country. Finally, the staging of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia, site of the holiest places in the Muslim world, stirred anger among devout Muslims who hated the idea of non-Muslims in that region. Among those who were angry was Osama bin Laden, a Saudi who founded al-Qaeda, a terrorist organization, to retaliate against both Saudi Arabia and the United States.
Meanwhile, closer to home, Bush decided in December 1989 that Panama’s dictator, Manuel Noriega, had to be removed. Noriega had received CIA support to oppose Communists in the region, but he had also become rich through drug trafficking and had become a brutal dictator. When his party lost a presidential election in May 1989, Noriega annulled the election. Knowing that the Carter-era treaty meant that the Panama Canal was going to be returned to Panama, Bush took no chances. On December 20, a U.S. assault team landed in Panama and took control of the country. They restored the democratically elected president of Panama, Guillermo Endara, and eventually arrested Noriega as a drug dealer and imprisoned him in Florida.
The Bush team also made other international efforts that had mixed results. The administration negotiated a North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) that would eliminate tariffs between the United States and Canada and Mexico, but Senate confirmation of the treaty was slow in coming. Into Somalia, a nation in northeast Africa threatened by famine and chaos, the United States sent 28,000 peacekeeping troops, but could not effect large-scale changes. To the surprise of many of its own citizens, Yugoslavia, which had been relatively stable since the end of World War II, disintegrated into ethnic hostility between its Eastern Orthodox Serbian, Roman Catholic Croatian, and Bosnian Muslim communities. In response to the new crisis in Yugoslavia, the United States supported a UN peacekeeping mission, which was ineffective, and an arms embargo. Even with the Cold War over, the world remained a confusing and dangerous place.
Education, Legislation, and the Supreme Court
In his inaugural address, George Bush angered the outgoing Ronald Reagan by saying that it was time “to make kinder the face of the Nation and gentler the face of the world. He also continued the Reagan assault on big government, insisting
842 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
that the new kindness must come from a “thousand points of light,” emerging from local nongovernmental groups around the country rather than from federal government programs.
Bush called himself an “education president.” Where Reagan sought to abolish the Department of Education and reduce the federal government’s role in education, Bush convened the nation s governors at an “Education Summit” in Charlottesville, Virginia, in the fall of 1989 to address the challenges in American public schools. The plan that emerged from Bush’s partnership with the governors, who were led by Arkansas governor Bill Clinton, was called America 2000. It sought to improve the nation s schools by setting new national standards for all students.
Bush also focused efforts on two other pieces of legislation that would have far-reaching results. He supported the Clean Air Act that toughened air quality standards and pollution controls. It would effect huge changes in industry and begin to shift more attention to environmental issues. He also led the fight for the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) that passed Congress in 1990. The ADA outlawed discrimination in employment, public services, and public accommodations for people with disabilities. It not only transformed the face of American buildings that now had to provide wheelchair ramps, elevators, and appropriate lavatories for those with physical disabilities, but also put in motion pervasive changes in hiring practices and services that would benefit all those with disabilities, including those who were deaf and blind.
Bush’s first appointment to the Supreme Court, David Souter, drew little controversy. Souter turned out to be a more liberal judge than many expected, probably including Bush, especially when he voted to affirm the court’s Roe v. Wade decision in 1992. When Thurgood Marshall retired, Bush stirred considerable controversy by nominating Clarence Thomas. Thomas, like Marshall, was an African-American, but while Marshall had been known as “Mr. Civil Rights” and was probably the most liberal member of the court in many years, Thomas was known as an unusually conservative Republican. In his confirmation hearings, Thomas was accused of sexual harassment by
Anita Hill, a black law professor and former member of Thomas’s staff.
Hill offered explicit testimony as to what Thomas had said and done, which was highly embarrassing to Thomas and his supporters. Hill was attacked in turn by conservatives, and Thomas called the assault a “high-tech lynching for uppity blacks,” but when he was confirmed by the narrowest of Senate votes, 52 to 48, many women concluded that the male senators did not take sexual harassment seriously. While Thomas took his seat on the court, more women ran for and won elective office the following year than in any previous time, increasing their numbers in the Senate, the House, and state legislatures.
Race: From Rodney King to O.J. Simpson
In March 1991, Rodney King, an African-American, failed to stop for police on the Foothill Freeway near San Fernando, California. Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) officers gave chase for 8 miles and finally arrested King. When King resisted arrest, four police officers beat him as he lay on the ground. A nearby resident used a home video camera to record the arrest and beating, and the video was quickly distributed around the nation. People were outraged.
Although King had resisted arrest, the officers had clearly continued to beat him long after he was subdued.
The four officers on the video were arrested. Their attorneys argued that they could not get a fair trial in Los Angeles and the trial was moved to mostly rural Simi County, California. The result of the move was that the officers faced an all-white jury, unlikely in Los Angeles County. In April 1992, the jury found three of the officers
Clean Air Act
Passed by Congress in 1990 as amendments to an earlier act, required substantial restrictions on air pollution.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Legislation that significantly improved options for people with disabilities.
The Supreme Court's 1973 Roe v. Wade decision, stating that the right to privacy guaranteed in the Constitution protects a woman's right to choose an abortion, remained controversial and impacted American / politics for decades to come, most of all in terms of the appointment every new Supreme Court justice.


not guilty and deadlocked on the fourth. The acquittal released pent-up anger in the black community in Los Angeles. Riots lasting 4 days resulted in 53 deaths, 2,300 injuries, and $1 billion in property damage. Black and Latino rioters targeted whites and Asians in their neighborhoods, perhaps especially Korean storeowners. A video from the riot showed a white truck driver being pulled out of his cab and beaten. Only the intervention of other blacks who got the driver to a hospital saved his life. For many, the arrest of King, the trial, and the riot that followed illustrated just how deeply lines were still drawn between races in the United States in the 1990s.
While the events around King got the headlines, scholars and activists debated the state of race relations. Some observed that despite what happened, much had changed since the 1950s when blacks were legally barred from white schools, white bus seats, and all-white polling places in many places. Orlando Patterson, a Harvard sociologist, wrote “Relations between ordinary Afro-Americans and Euro-Americans are, in fact, the best they have ever been, although still far from ideal.” Other scholars were less sure, noting that events like the beating of Rodney King and data about the educational experience of many black and Latino students confirmed that much had not changed. Andrew Hacker wrote that “A huge racial chasm remains, and there are few signs that the coming century will see it closed.”
In 1994, another crisis illustrated the depth of the racial divide in the United States. O.J. Simpson, a celebrated African-American Hall of Fame former football star, was arrested in June after his divorced wife, Nicole Brown, who was white, and her white friend, Ron Goldman, were found stabbed to death just outside her condominium in an exclusive neighborhood of Los Angeles. When the police issued a warrant for Simpson’s arrest, he and a friend fled in Simpson’s white Bronco down the Artesia Freeway while perhaps 100,000 Americans watched on TV. Simpson eventually surrendered, and his trial continued for most of the next year. The evidence against Simpson seemed strong, but black and white Americans saw it differently. In one poll, 63 percent of whites thought he would get a fair trial while 69 percent of blacks thought he would not. The trial was a media circus. Simpson’s lead attorney, Johnnie Cochran, a tough African-American trial lawyer, proved that the investigation of Simpson by the Los Angeles police was filled with racist assumptions, although he did not prove Simpson’s innocence. When in October 1995 a jury acquitted Simpson of the murder charge, a majority of blacks agreed with the verdict, and celebrations broke out in black communities, while most whites were stunned. Regardless of whoever killed Brown and Goldman, the Simpson trial showed that Americans of different races were deeply divided in how they viewed the criminal justice system in the 1990s.
Economic Troubles and the Election of 1992
Bush’s greatest political failure was his inability to manage the U.S. economy. After 1990, the economy went into a serious recession. During 1991 and 1992, AT&T fired 100,000 workers, GM fired 74,000, and two major airlines, Pan Am and Eastern, went bankrupt, throwing more out of work. People blamed the president. With his preoccupation with foreign policy, Bush seemed out of touch, a perception that did not help his political standing.
Bush’s economic problems became an even worse political liability when he decided, in the face of the rapidly increasing government debt, that he needed to raise taxes in spite of his promise not to do so. When the top tax bracket was increased from 28 to 31.5 percent, the New York Post headline said, “Read my lips: I Lied.” Conservative Republicans never forgave Bush.
With the Republican Party in not-quite-open revolt and the nation’s economy in trouble, Democrats smelled victory in the 1992 election. Arkansas governor Bill Clinton soon emerged as a Democratic front-runner. When Clinton lost the New Hampshire primary, he called himself the “comeback kid,” and campaigned harder than ever. Clinton demonstrated a combination of strengths and of weaknesses.
844 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
29.1
President Bush, future president Clinton, and independent candidate Ross Perot debated in the lively 1992 presidential campaign.
He was brilliant. Even though he grew up in poverty, he excelled in school and won scholarships to Georgetown University, was awarded a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford, and then went on to Yale Law School. At Yale, he also met and married fellow student Hillary Rodham. He was as charismatic on the campaign trail as John F. Kennedy had been. As one of the founders of the Democratic Leadership Council, he was a moderate who distanced himself from his party’s more liberal members. Clinton also had his weaknesses. The explanations he gave for his rumored womanizing, draft dodging, and one-time marijuana smoking were never convincing and he earned the name “Slick Willie.” But he was a tough campaigner who would not quit. He won the Democratic nomination, asked Tennessee senator Al Gore, a fellow baby boomer, to be his running mate, and in spite of a personally chaotic style, kept his campaign focused. A sign in the Clinton campaign headquarters reading “It’s the economy, stupid.” said it all.
An independent candidate also entered the race, eccentric billionaire H. Ross Perot. Perot described the deficit as being “like a crazy aunt we keep down in the basement. All the neighbors know she’s there but nobody wants to talk about her.” He said that Bush’s NAFTA Treaty would produce a “giant sucking sound” of American jobs leaving the country. Although given virtually no chance of winning, Perot was the most popular third-party candidate in many years.
Bush was challenged for the Republican nomination by conservative commentator Pat Buchanan, known as the “pit bull of the Right.” Bush easily defeated Buchanan for the nomination, but the attack weakened the president. The conservative dominance of the 1992 Republican convention, especially the vocal role of religious conservatives like Buchanan, alienated many more moderate voters. Throughout the fall campaign, the president seemed disengaged. It was not a close contest. Clinton won almost 45 million votes to Bush’s 39 million. Surprisingly, Perot won almost 20 million votes, hurting Bush more than Clinton. Democrats retained control of the Senate 57 to 43 and the House 258 to 176.
29J
Quick Review How did George H.W. Bush's foreign policy concerns evolve over the course of his presidency?
Chapter 29 A New World On
THE CLINTON PRESIDENCY

2M
29.2
Analyze the impact of the Clinton presidency and the Clinton-Gingrich conflict on the country.
Clinton came to office with high hopes. He idolized John F. Kennedy and wanted to be remembered as another Kennedy. Clinton, the first baby boomer president, replaced Bush, the last of eight presidents who had served in World War II. He saw his coming to office as a generational change and told the country, “Today, a generation raised in the shadows of the Cold War assumes new responsibilities.” He set an activist agenda, saying, “We must invest more in our own people, in their jobs, in their future, and at the same time cut our massive debt.” Clinton did cut the federal deficit, dramatically. Success on other fronts, however, was more elusive.
29.2
First Lady Hilary Rodham Clinton took an unusually active policy role, leading the task force to create health care legislation in 1994.
The Early Clinton Agenda: It's Still—Mostly—the Economy
Clinton knew he owed his election to the poor state of the nations economy. Clinton also knew that he would be reelected in 1996 only if the economic picture brightened. Having campaigned as a moderate Democrat, he surprised many when he made health care reform his first major policy initiative. Clinton, however, was convinced that reforming the nations chaotic health insurance system would provide a significant jolt to the economy and that providing insurance for the 35 million Americans who had no insurance would help close the growing gap between rich and poor.
In spite of personal tensions in their marriage, Bill and Hillary Clinton were an especially close political team, sometimes compared to Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. The president appointed his wife, along with trusted associate Ira Magaziner, to lead a task force to redesign the nation’s health care system. Unfortunately, the Clinton-Magaziner team made two significant errors. First, their final 1,342-page report was too long and far too complicated. Second, while they consulted hundreds of experts in developing the report, they failed to consult with Congress. In 1993, Clinton said, “If I don’t get health care, I’ll wish I didn’t run for President.” In the end, he did not get it. Conservatives in the Republican minority, led by Congressman Newt Gingrich from Georgia, attacked the plan from the day it was announced. Representatives of physicians and the insurance industry attacked the plan with TV ads and heavily financed congressional lobbying. Without strong support from a large segment of the population or the Democratic majority in Congress, the plan was doomed. In August 1994, the president announced that he was dropping the plan. It had not yet reached a single vote in Congress, but the probable outcome had become clear.
Other issues also got in the way of what Clinton wanted to accomplish. When Clinton tried to fire long-time staff members of the White House travel office for alleged improprieties, he was blocked and accused of trying to give those jobs to friends. When he tried to fulfill a campaign promise to end the ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the armed forces, he was blocked again. The resulting compromise of “Don’t ask, don’t tell,” in which officers would not ask about sexual orientation and soldiers and sailors would keep their sexual orientation hidden or face discharge, satisfied no one.
Only weeks into the new presidency, Clinton’s administration had to handle the fallout from an unexpected confrontation in Texas. In Waco, Texas, cult members led by David Koresh had blockaded themselves in their group’s compound. A gun battle with agents of the FBI and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms on February 28 led to a 7-week stand-off. When the FBI became convinced that children in the compound were being abused, they attacked. Koresh ordered the compound burned, and he and more than 80 of his followers, including 21 children, were killed. It was a horrible outcome that brought significant criticism of the administration and especially of Janet Reno, the new attorney general who had approved the raid, though few knew what could have been a good outcome.
f46 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Clinton had more success on other fronts. Within 2 weeks of taking office, he signed the Family and Medical Leave Act, which Bush had vetoed twice. The law guaranteed up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family medical emergencies and pregnancy. In his campaign, he had promised to develop a national service plan, and Congress quickly approved Clinton s AmeriCorps, which encouraged volunteerism and promised financial support for college costs to those who gave a year of national service. In September 1994, the first 20,000 AmeriCorps volunteers were sworn in. Congress also authorized $2 billion for Goals 2000, the Clinton version of President Bush’s America 2000 education plan to set national educational standards in core academic subjects. In addition, Congress approved a modest ban on semiautomatic assault weapons and a “Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act” that required antiabortion protesters to keep some distance from medical clinics or places of worship. During his first 2 years, the Senate confirmed two of Clinton’s Supreme Court nominees, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer. With their confirmation, the court’s conservative drift seemed to stop.
In addition, Clinton was convinced that the huge deficit, which had grown substantially under Reagan and Bush, was creating a drag on the American economy. He was also anxious to establish his political credentials as a moderate. In August 1993, less than 7 months into office and with the health care bill still pending, Congress passed Clinton’s first budget. The budget infuriated conservatives because it included a tax increase, and it infuriated liberals because it did little for federal programs. The administration’s goal was simple: balance the federal budget and lower the federal debt. Clinton succeeded, and during his term in office, the total federal spending as a share of the U.S. gross domestic product dropped from 21.5 percent to 19.1 percent. Starting in 1998, real surpluses allowed a major reduction in the federal debt.
Immediately after Clinton’s budget passed Congress, he turned his attention to getting congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which had been negotiated by George Bush. Few gave NAFTA much chance for approval. Labor unions hated the treaty because it proposed to reduce all trade barriers between the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and the unions feared it would cost jobs. Ross Perot had based his third-party campaign on opposition to NAFTA and had succeeded in winning 19 percent of the vote. Nevertheless, Clinton believed that free trade and the development of an unfettered global economy was the key to long-term prosperity. He allied with Republicans in Congress, and against some of his closest Democratic allies, to get the treaty passed, and he signed it in December 1993.
Although Clinton saw himself as a moderate to conservative Democrat, conservative Republicans, especially those in the House of Representatives, did not think he was nearly conservative enough. Clinton also sought to undercut Republican efforts to differentiate themselves from him, which Republicans found utterly frustrating. Under the leadership of a Georgia congressman, Newt Gingrich, working with congressmen Dick Armey and Tom DeLay of Texas, House Republicans planned for the 1994 midterm elections. The House of Representatives had enjoyed a Democratic majority and a Democratic Speaker for 60 of the 64 years between 1930 and 1994. While the Senate and the White House changed hands, the House seemed permanently Democratic. But a new generation of representatives, coming mostly from suburban districts, especially in the South, where there had been few Republicans elected until the 1970s, were determined to create a Republican majority in the Congress and enact their agenda. They were very successful. In November 1994, 34 Democrats were defeated in their bids for reelection, a new Republican majority took control, and Gingrich became the Speaker of the House.
"The Era of Big Government Is Over"
With the new Republican majority and Newt Gingrich as the new speaker coming to power at the end of Clinton’s second year in office, the chance for significant legislative victories for Clinton virtually disappeared. Clinton would spend much of the next 6 years either trying to hold on to past Democratic victories or doing what he and
Goals 2000
Legislation that set tough new goals over the coming decades to improve the quality of American schooling.
Not all Americans supported the NAFTA trade agreement. Many feared it would cost a significant number of jobs in the United States.
Chapter 29 A New World Order
American Voices
Republican Contract with America, 1994
Contests for seats in the U.S. House of Representatives are traditionally local. In the 1994 campaign, however, 337 Republican candidates endorsed a common platform in a dramatic ceremony on the Capitol steps. Their "Contract with America" represented the voice of conservative Americans.
As Republican Members of the House of Representatives and as citizens seeking to join that body we propose not just to change its policies, but even more important, to restore the bonds of trust between the people and their elected representatives....
Thereafter, within the first 100 days of the 104th Congress, we shall bring to the House Floor the following bills, each to be given full and open debate, each to be given a clear and fair vote and each to be immediately available this day for public inspection and scrutiny.
THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY ACT: A
balanced budget/ tax limitation amendment and a legislative line-item veto to restore fiscal responsibility to an out-of-control Congress, requiring them to live under the same budget constraints as families and businesses. THE TAKING BACK OUR STREETS ACT:
An anticrime package including stronger truth-in-sentencing, "good faith" exclusionary rule exemptions, effective death penalty provisions, and cuts in social spending from this summer's "crime" bill to fund prison construction and additional law enforcement to keep people secure in their neighborhoods and kids safe in their schools. THE PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY ACT:
Discourage illegitimacy and teen pregnancy by prohibiting welfare to minor mothers and denying increased AFDC for additional children while on welfare, cut spending for welfare programs, and enact a tough 2-years-and-out provision with work requirements to promote individual responsibility. THE FAMILY REINFORCEMENT ACT:
Child support enforcement, tax incentives for adoption, strengthening rights of parents in their children's education, stronger child pornography laws, and an elderly dependent care tax credit to reinforce the central role of families in American society. THE AMERICAN DREAM RESTORATION ACT: A
$500 per child tax credit, begin repeal of the marriage tax penalty, and creation of American Dream Savings Accounts to provide middle class tax relief. THE NATIONAL SECURITY RESTORATION ACT:
No U.S. troops under U.N. command and restoration of the essential parts of our national security funding to strengthen our national defense and maintain our credibility around the world. THE SENIOR CITIZENS FAIRNESS ACT:
Raise the Social Security earnings limit which currently forces seniors out of the workforce, repeal the 1993 tax hikes on Social Security benefits and provide tax incentives for private long-term care insurance to let older Americans keep more of what they have earned over the years. THE JOB CREATION AND WAGE ENHANCEMENT ACT:
Small business incentives, capital gains cut and indexation, neutral cost recovery, risk assessment/cost-benefit analysis, strengthening the Regulatory Flexibility Act and unfunded mandate reform to create jobs and raise worker wages.
THE COMMON SENSE LEGAL REFORM ACT:
"Loser pays" laws, reasonable limits on punitive damages, and reform of product liability laws to stem the endless tide of litigation. THE CITIZEN LEGISLATURE ACT: A
first-ever vote on term limits to replace career politicians with citizen legislators. Source: Downloaded from, http://www.nationalcenter.org/ContractwithAmerica.html August 2, 2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What fundamental principles and assumptions link the 10 initiatives included in the contract?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What does the contract tell you about the political landscape of the 1990s?
To which groups was the contract meant to appeal? Which groups were most likely to find it objectionable?

his closest political advisor, Dick Morris, called “triangulating,” finding a third point between increasingly conservative Republicans and increasingly liberal Democrats to stake out their own position, one that sometimes undercut both.
The biggest battle between the Clinton administration and the Gingrich Republicans came in late 1995, only months into the tenure of the new Congress. After several months of budget battles, Congress passed a budget that included cuts in social programs. Clinton vetoed the budget with the result that the government was briefly without a budget, forcing a partial government shut down for 6 days in
848 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
November. After temporary legislation reopened government offices later that month, the Republican House passed a budget with even further cuts, reducing funds for food stamps, Medicare, and other domestic program. Republican leaders proudly announced, This is a fundamental change in the direction of government.” Clinton again vetoed the budget, and on December 16, the government shut down for 21 days. Federal employees went without their paychecks; national parks and “nonessential” government offices closed. Only in January was a compromise reached that restored most of the cuts. Most political observers thought Clinton had won the battle, painting Gingrich as an extremist and Clinton as a cautious moderate.
In the context of this tense budget debate, Clinton went to Congress in January 1996 to give his annual State of the Union message. He announced, “The era of Big Government is over.” Many Democrats wondered who had really won the budget showdown. Clinton had already promised that one of his major policy goals for 1996 was to put an end to welfare as we know it.” After vetoing more conservative legislation, in August 1996, Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act that replaced the federal government’s long-standing Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program with temporary assistance that prevented most people, except the disabled, from receiving more than 2 years of assistance, with a 5-year lifetime maximum. New York senator Daniel Moynihan called the result, which dropped 2 million black and Latino students from eligibility, the “most brutal act of social policy since Reconstruction.” Fortunately, the economy was experiencing a boom time when the law was passed; the minimum wage was raised, and there were jobs to be found, at least in the short run. The long-time cost to some of the nation’s poorest people was a different matter.
Clinton took other positions that disappointed liberals and heartened conservatives. He signed the Defense of Marriage Act, which said no state was required to recognize a same-sex marriage from another state. Since no state yet allowed same-sex marriage when the law passed, it was a symbolic move, but for gay and lesbian voters who had supported Clinton, it was a frustrating limitation that would have a greater impact in future years.
In spite of the Republican gains in the 1994 elections, the 1996 presidential election was seldom in doubt. The Republicans nominated conservative Senator Robert Dole, a decorated World War II hero and a long-time Washington insider who preferred compromise to Gingrich-style conflict. Dole had a good sense of humor but was not a strong campaigner. Clinton adopted many Republican issues and campaigned energetically. Clinton’s fundraising ability meant that the two parties were closely matched in available funds, where previously, Republicans had traditionally outspent Democrats by a two-to-one margin. Perot again ran as an outsider. Clinton won 49 percent of the vote to Dole’s 40 percent. Perot’s vote dropped to less than 9 percent. Clinton coasted to a second term, but with Republican majorities in both houses of Congress.
In the post-Cold War era, other trends were reshaping the American political scene. By the 1990s, the majority of Americans lived in suburbs, up from only a quarter of the population in the 1950s. The combination of suburbanization and the Voting Rights Act typically led to the nation’s urban centers electing liberal Democrats, often African-Americans or Latinos who reflected their districts majority, and the surrounding suburbs electing white conservatives who reflected these districts. Especially in the South and West, Republican victories often came at the cost of moderates of either party, rather than liberal Democrats, with the result that, as the Republican Party got more conservative, the Democratic Party got more liberal.
Since 1900, if not earlier, the Republican Party represented the elite, whether major corporate executives, Wall Street investors, or small town business leaders. The Democrats were the party of the working class, especially union members. The New Deal Coalition, which had kept Congress solidly Democratic for so long, included union members, urban immigrants (especially the Irish), and the white South. During the
29.1
29,2
293
Defense of Marriage Act
Legislation that required the federal government to ignore provisions of any state act recognizing same-sex marriages; was declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2013.
Chapter 29 A New World Order 849
L ■
Ml
M2
Oslo Accords
A 1993 agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in which Israel agreed that the PLO could govern the West Bank and Gaza Strip in exchange for PLO recognition of Israel's right to exist.
New Deal, most African-American voters, who had traditionally been Republicans after the Civil War, shifted to the Democratic Party. However, by the time Clinton came to office, much had changed. Many white southerners had turned against the civil rights movement, which they associated with the Democrats, and had become Republicans. Many white workers in the North, especially those in ethnic enclaves, were making the same transition for the same reason. In addition, union membership had fallen to below 10 percent of nongovernment workers, reducing the union vote. At the same time, more and more middle- and upper-middle-class professionals, including teachers, journalists, lawyers, and many in high-tech industries, supported the more liberal policies of the Democrats. In contrast to either 1930 or 1960, when if one knew a person’s income, one could make a good guess as to their political party preference, no such guess was possible in 1990.
As the political divisions between the two parties grew sharper, the political discourse of the country grew more caustic. Angry talk radio shows drew huge audiences. Rush Limbaugh, who called women activists “feminazis” and environmentalists “environmental wackos,” drew an audience of 20 million. The National Rifle Association stridently attacked any politician of either party who voted for any gun control. Common Cause sought to speak for a liberal perspective. Few spoke for moderation or even good manners. Respectful differences did not sell radio advertising. Likewise, respecting differences did not win political debates in Washington in the 1990s.
Small Wars and Dangerous Terrorists—Clinton's Foreign Policy
Clinton once said, “Foreign policy is not what I came here to do.” Nevertheless, as president, he could not ignore the rest of the world. His proudest foreign policy accomplishment came early, with the passage of NAFTA, but it was far from his last foreign engagement.
Early in his first term, in September 1993, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leader Yasser Arafat shook hands in the White House after signing the Oslo Accords, which Norway had helped to broker. The Oslo agreement led to a suspension of the intifada, the Palestinian uprising that had been going on since 1987. The PLO recognized Israel’s right to exist and renounced terrorism, while Israel agreed that the PLO would assume governing authority in parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. It was an optimistic moment for peace in the Middle East that ended all too soon when an outraged Israeli assassinated Rabin.
In 1993, events in Somalia and Haiti demanded attention. Bush had initially sent troops to Somalia to help secure peace in that war-torn region of Africa, and Clinton authorized 440 elite troops. When American troops sought to capture a warlord who had ordered the killing of Pakistani UN troops, two U.S. Black Hawk helicopters were shot down in Mogadishu and 18 Americans were killed; the body of one was dragged through the streets of the city. Clinton immediately withdrew all Americans. In Haiti, when demonstrators blocked the landing of U.S. peacekeepers in Haiti, Clinton did not try to persist, in spite of his desire to support the democratically elected president Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In light of experiences in Somalia and Haiti, Clinton took an even more cautious stand in Rwanda when civil war broke out in April 1994. For 100 days, Hutus butchered perhaps 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutus who had tried to stop the genocide. The United States and the world did virtually nothing although perhaps 70 percent of the Tutsi population was killed. After he left office, Clinton said that his failure to act in Rwanda was his greatest regret, but there was little support for intervention in 1994.
At the same time, the former Yugoslavia was continuing to come apart. Slobodan Milosevic, the nationalist leader of Serbia, wanted to create a new “pure” Serbian nation. He led a slaughter in which perhaps 200,000 Bosnian Muslims were killed by Bosnian and Serbian nationalists. Some 6,000 UN peacekeepers were held as virtual prisoners while the slaughter went on (see Map 29-2).
B«85°
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present

MAP 29-2 Yugoslavia Comes Apart. In 1991-92, the nation of Yugoslavia, which had been created in the aftermath of World War I, came apart as ethnic rivalries burst into warfare.

29.1
292
293
While the United States and most of Europe did nothing, the battle continued. Finally in the summer of 1995, Clinton ordered the bombing of Serbian positions. When in July 1995 Serbia forced 40,000 Muslim refugees out of a UN safe area around Srebrenica, and then murdered some 7,000 Muslim men and boys, Clinton determined that further action was needed. In August, after further Serb attacks, the United States joined with other NATO forces in massive air strikes on Bosnian Serb positions. The bombing and NATO support for Croatian and Bosnian Muslim ground forces led Milosevic to agree to join negotiations at the Wright-Patterson Air Force base in Dayton, Ohio. The Dayton Peace Accords led to a significant reduction of the conflict, the placement of 60,000 NATO soldiers in Bosnia, including 20,000 Americans, and the eventual war crimes trial of Milosevic. In June 1999, the American commander in Europe, General Wesley Clark, convinced Clinton that the United States needed to intervene again to stop Serbian aggression in the province of Kosovo where Muslims made up 90 percent of the population. A bombing raid on the Serbian capital of Belgrade resulted in a bomb falling on the Chinese Embassy, which killed several staff members and deeply hurt U.S.-Chinese relations.
Iraq also remained an issue, even though the war with Iraq over Kuwait was over before Clinton came to office. After the CIA concluded that Saddam Hussein had tried to arrange the assassination of former president Bush, Clinton ordered a missile strike on Baghdad that destroyed the country’s intelligence headquarters. The government also continued to monitor potential terrorist activity emanating from Iran or North Korea, both of which were seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
In his efforts at foreign relations, Clinton also tried to broker peace agreements. In 1995 he sought to recognize the government of Vietnam and supported a mission by three veterans of the Vietnam war then serving in the U.S. Senate, Democrats John Kerry of Massachusetts, Robert Kerrey of Nebraska, and Republican John McCain
Dayton Peace Accords
A
November 1995 agreement that began the process to bring peace to the former Yugoslavia. Chapter 29 A New World Order 851
29,1
29.2
Good Friday Accords
A 1998 peace agreement to bring a peaceful settlement to the long-standing battles between Catholic and Protestant factions over the government of Northern Ireland.
0,5
of Arizona, all of whom testified that there were no remaining prisoners of war in Vietnam and urged reconciliation. In addition, he worked for peace in Northern Ireland and in 1994 appointed former U.S. senator George Mitchell as special envoy. Mitchell helped broker the Good Friday Accords of 1998, a promising breakthrough in war-torn Ireland.
Terrorism at Home and Abroad
Terrorism, both domestic and foreign, posed unique challenges because terrorists were difficult to find, to predict, and to deal with. While international terrorist acts deeply frightened the United States, a new form of domestic terrorism, though perhaps less organized, stunned the nation during Clintons term in office. The actions of the FBI in the Waco, Texas, standoff with David Koresh had infuriated Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, who believed that the FBI attack needed to be avenged. They managed to build a powerful truck bomb, and on April 19, 1995, McVeigh drove the bomb to the parking lot of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City and detonated it. The resulting blast killed 168 people, including a number of children in a day care center. The bombing was the largest terrorist attack in U.S. history up to that time. McVeigh and Nichols were eventually captured, and McVeigh was executed, but government officials and the public knew that they were not the only Americans so disaffected that they might turn to violence.
Four years later, two deeply disaffected teenagers, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, whose journals reflected their fascination with the Oklahoma City bombing, went on a rampage at their high school in Littleton, Colorado, a day after the anniversary of the earlier bombing. Their deadly rampage was the first of what would be many similar school shootings, often in suburban or rural areas and often initiated by disturbed and angry males who sought revenge against teachers and more popular students and the fleeting fame that came with such actions.
In February 1993, only a month after Clinton took office, Muslim terrorists bombed the World Trade Center in New York City, killing six. Over 1,000 people were injured in the blast and 5,000 were evacuated from the buildings. The bombing
The October 2000 bombing of the American destroyer USS Cole in Yemen was one of several terrorist attacks against the United States during Clinton's years in office.
852 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Causes of the Columbine Shootings

On April 20, 1999, two high school students went on a shooting rampage at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, killing 12 students and a teacher before committing suicide. The two had planned the day carefully and came to school well-armed with rifles and firebombs. Ever since that tragic day, and through the other school shootings that have followed in subsequent years, people have tried to make sense of what happened and why. One journalist, Neal Gabler, writing for the Los Angeles Times immediately after the event, asked readers to locate the tragedy in cultural and historical context:
Of all the bizarre sidelights to the horrifying massacre at
Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., Tuesday, the most bizarre may have been the story of the students trapped inside the school who called local TV stations on their cell phones and provided brief commentaries on the action. According to one report, they signed off only because they feared the intruders might be watching television themselves and thus discover the whereabouts of the cell-phone users. All of which suggests that even for the perpetrators and their victims, television was the great mediator.
By now, this is hardly surprising. Like so many real-life dramas in America, the Littleton tragedy became a media event even before the smoke had cleared and anyone knew what was really happening. Copters buzzed overhead, reporters swarmed the scene and commentators were soon delivering sententious analyses of what it all meant, giving us a sense of deja vu.
But tragedies like this are media events not only because the media immediately latch onto them. Often they are media events in two far more important senses: first because the perpetrators usually seem to have modeled their behavior after certain figures in the popular culture; and, second, because the rampages seem ultimately to have been staged for the media on the assumption that if you kill it, they will come. Or, put another way, what we witnessed at Littleton was not just inchoate rage. It was a premeditated performance in which the two gunmen roamed the school dispatching victims, whooping with delight after each murder. Without pop culture, the slaughter would have been unimaginable.
Begin with the killers. In the inevitable postmortems that follow these horrors, it was reported that the outcasts Dylan Klebold and Eric Harris were part of a high school clique whose members wore long black trench coats and which dubbed itself the Trench Coat Mafia, a cinematic image if ever there was one. They were also devotees of the computer games "Doom" and "Quake," in which players prowl virtual hallways shooting virtual victims with virtual guns. They worshipped Adolf Hitler, loved Goth music, and had a special fondness for Marilyn Manson, the mordant rockstar whose satanic persona is designed to scandalize parents of his fans. In short, Harris and Klebold were creatures of pop culture.
Given how much these two seemed to have been shaped by movies, music, and computer games, it is tempting to blame the media once again for providing guidance to young would-be sociopaths....
What helped give these fantasies body is yet another new instrument of the entertainment age: the Internet. Movies provided a personal reverie for those disaffected teenagers of the past... .With the Internet to connect them, teenagers are no longer silent sufferers....When you live within a virtual reality, you have to expect some addled individuals won't accept the difference between the movie or video screen and the screen of life.
Source: Neal Gabler, "Becoming Your Fantasy in Virtual Munch Beer Hall," Los Angeles Times, April 25,1999, reprinted in Stuart A. Kallen, editor, The 1990s (San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 2000), pp. 85-89.
Thinking Critically
1.	Comparison
What do you think about Gabler's description of teenagers in the age of cell phones, the Internet, and other new media in comparison to teenagers of other times? Does it seem accurate?
2.	Contextualization
In the context of the 1990s, what other factors should
Gabler include in seeking to understand the Columbine shootings?
29.3
llll
had been fueled by anger at the United States over its support for Israel and over the fact that U.S. troops had been stationed in Saudi Arabia near Muslim holy places. Some of the terrorists involved had gotten training from a relatively new terrorist group known as al-Qaeda.
The leader of al-Qaeda was a rich Saudi, Osama bin Laden, who had been expelled from his home country for his terrorist leanings and then expelled from Africa, where he had been living. He landed in Afghanistan and supported the country’s Taliban government. In February 1998, when bin Laden called for a holy war against the
Chapter 29 A New World Order 853
west, the CIA estimated that he had some 15,000 followers, though little was known about the hard-to-find organization. In August 1998, al-Qaeda operatives managed to bomb the U.S. embassies in both Kenya and Tanzania. Most of the 223 killed and 4,500 wounded were African civilians working in or around the embassies, though 12 Americans were also killed. In October 2000, another al-Qaeda bomb ripped a hole in the hull of the Navy’s USS Cole while it was anchored in a port in Yemen. Seventeen sailors were killed. In all, some 90 Americans were killed by foreign terrorists, mostly bin Laden’s al-Qaeda, during the Clinton years. Far worse was to come in 2001, but the warning signs were there.
Scandal and Impeachment
On January 21, 1998, the Washington Post carried a story that surprised, but probably did not shock, the nation. The president of the United States had been involved in an affair with a young White House intern and had lied about it to his wife, to his administration, to the press, and under oath. It made for a sensational news story, and in the months that followed, the young intern, Monica Lewinsky, and the sexual escapades of Bill Clinton, remained front-page news.
Kenneth Starr, a zealous lawyer and former Republican solicitor general, was appointed as an independent prosecutor in 1994 to look into accusations that the president and Hillary Clinton’s land dealings in a development at the Whitewater River in Arkansas had been improper. He spent the next 4 years, and a significant amount of taxpayer money, investigating but never discovered evidence of a crime. However, before being appointed, Starr was an advisor to the legal team assembled for a sexual harassment suit brought against Bill Clinton by Paula Corbin Jones, an Arkansas state employee who claimed that, while Clinton was governor, he had ordered a state trooper to bring her to his hotel room and sought sexual favors. Because of the trooper’s role, the affair came to be known a “troopergate” in the media.
By late 1997, both the Paula Jones lawsuit and the Whitewater investigation were crawling through the legal process with no end in sight and only limited political damage to the president. Then the situation changed rapidly. A disgruntled former White House staffer, Linda Tripp, befriended Monica Lewinsky and secretly recorded their conversations as Lewinsky shared intimate details of her relationship with the president. As Lewinsky described it, she began her affair with Clinton during the government shutdown of November 1995. Tripp then shared the tapes with legal counsel for Paula Jones, who used the evidence to bolster her case that Clinton regularly engaged in extramarital affairs. She also shared the tapes with Starr. For Starr, the tapes proved that the president had lied under oath and perhaps also urged Lewinsky to lie, both federal crimes that could lead to impeachment.
Clinton denied the whole story. At a press conference a few days after the Washington Post story broke, he said, “I want to say one thing to the American people. I want you to listen to me. I’m going to say this again. I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Ms. Lewinsky. I never told anybody to lie, not a single time, never. These allegations are false. And I need to go back to work for the American people.” Hillary Clinton denounced Starr as being part of a “vast right-wing conspiracy,” and said—accurately—that he “has literally spent four years looking at every telephone call we’ve made, every check we’ve ever written, scratching for dirt.”
In the summer of 1998, Lewinsky told a federal grand jury about her affair with the president and produced a semen-stained dress that she had saved. Backed into a corner, on August 17, Clinton told a federal grand jury that he had engaged in an “inappropriate relationship with Lewinsky. That evening, he gave a TV speech in which he said, I did have a relationship with Ms. Lewinsky that was not appropriate....It constituted a critical lapse in judgment and a personal failure.” And he admitted he had misled people, including even my wife.” But he also insisted that the Starr investigation had gone on too long, cost too much, and hurt too many innocent people.”
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
854
Many, even among Clinton s closest supporters, were furious, if not at the affair, then at the lying. At a time when the country needed to deal with its economy and the terrorist attacks in Kenya and Tanzania, the president was distracted and untrustworthy. Starr and the Republican majority in Congress were eager to punish the president. Starr sent his report to the House of Representatives. In December, the House, with its Republican majority, voted to impeach President Clinton on the grounds that he had committed perjury in his original testimony to a federal grand jury and had sought to obstruct justice in the Paula Jones case. It was only the second time in U.S. history that a president had been impeached. (Nixon resigned before an impeachment vote.) According to the Constitution, removing the president is a two-part process. The House must vote on impeachment—essentially the same as a grand jury indict-menf then the House acts a prosecutor while the Senate acts as the jury, with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presiding. In Clinton’s case, the Senate was convinced that although his behavior was inappropriate, it hardly met the level of “high crimes and misdemeanors” specified in the Constitution. On February 12, 1999, the Senate rejected the charges against Clinton by a vote of 55 to 45 for the perjury charge and 50 to 50 for the obstruction of justice charge, a very safe margin since a two-thirds vote was required to convict. Five to 10 Republicans joined all of the Democrats in voting not guilty on the two charges. Clinton could focus again on being president. The Starr investigation cost $60 million.
Speaker Gingrich had been among the president’s harshest critics, but the impeachment did not turn out well for Gingrich. Just before the impeachment vote, Republicans lost five seats in the November midterm congressional elections. It was the first time since 1934 that the party holding the White House showed gains in midterm elections. But the speaker, who had been an avid prosecutor of the president, was further hurt by the revelation that he, too, had been having an extramarital affair with a young staff aide. He resigned as speaker and announced that he would leave the House. The newly elected Republican Speaker, Robert Livingston of Louisiana, turned out to also be having an affair and he, too, resigned.
While many in the media were fascinated by the whole case, the American public was surprisingly indifferent. Even if many did not approve of an extramarital affair, it did not seem as big an issue as it might once have been. Clinton was hardly the first president to stray from his marriage vows. Perhaps more important, the nation was prosperous and at peace in 1999. Clinton seemed to be doing his job, whatever his personal life. As the case wound down, Starr’s approval rating was 19 percent. Clinton’s seldom dropped below 55 percent in his second term.
The Prosperous 1990s
Although an economic downturn brought Clinton to office, an economic upsurge kept him there. After Clinton’s second year in office, the U.S. economy started to grow, and it did not stop growing for the next 6 years. Nearly all Americans were better off at the end of Clinton’s term than they had been at the beginning. The signs of the new prosperity were everywhere. Of the nation’s 107 million households, 106 million had a color TV by 2000, 96 million had a VCR or DVD player, 92 million a microwave, and 81 million had air-conditioning. Houses were larger than ever before. Americans were eating better as fresh, local, and seasonal foods became more widely available and more popular.
The prosperity of the 1990s was the result of many factors. Clinton’s budget, which brought down the federal deficit and produced the first federal budget surpluses in decades, made more money available for investment and spending and kept interest rates low, all factors in the prosperity. Experts argued about whether Clinton’ free-trade policies, like NAFTA, were helping or hurting the economy, but certainly more goods were in circulation as a result. Changes in agriculture made farms and farmers more productive so fewer people, working less land, could produce more food-and more variety of foods-than ever before-enough to feed the
29.1
29.2
293
Chapter 29 A New World Order 855
United States and much of the rest of the world. The boom in technology was producing many new products and cutting the costs of items such as TVs and computers that were already on the market. In addition, easily available personal credit, at low interest rates fed the consumer spending and consumer confidence, even though it allowed people to pile up worrisome levels of debt. In his last State of the Union message in January 2000, Clinton was able to say, “Never before, has our nation enjoyed, at once, so much prosperity and social progress with so little internal crisis and so few external threats.” No wonder the president remained popular and the people of the United States relatively happy.
Bush v. Gore—The Election and the Court Case of 2000
The Constitution prevented Clinton from running for a third term in 2000. Even so, he still had a remarkably high approval rating despite the affair with Monica Lewinsky that had tarnished his reputation. The logical candidate for the Democratic nomination was Vice President Al Gore. During the 8 years that Gore served as vice president, he established a solid reputation with special expertise in government operations, the use of the Internet, and the environment. Gores 1992 book, Earth in the Balance, described “humankind’s assault on the earth.” Although Gore had worked with Clinton for 8 years, he and the president were never especially close, and Gore had been deeply offended by the Monica Lewinsky affair. He selected Connecticut senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate, the first Jew to be on a major party’s national ticket. Lieberman had also been offended by the presidents behavior and said so on the Senate floor.
The two leading candidates for the Republican nomination were George W. Bush, the governor of Texas and the son of the former president, and Arizona senator John McCain. McCain was considered more liberal compared with Bush who called himself a “compassionate conservative.” By March, Bush had wrapped up the nomination. Bush asked former Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney to handle the vice presidential selection and, in the end, Cheney himself became the nominee.
Gore made a fateful decision to distance himself from Clinton and did not call on the president to do much campaigning. He campaigned in favor of tough gun control legislation and for women’s right to choose on abortion decisions, and he promised to keep the Social Security trust fund in a “lock box” separate from the rest of the federal budget. Many, even among his supporters, found him to be stiff and “wooden,” hardly the relaxed and at-ease campaigner that Bill Clinton had been.
Bush promised a major tax cut, giving the current budget surplus back to the people. He favored allowing people to invest some of their Social Security contributions in their own stock market accounts. He promised to reform public education. He told the country that he was “a uniter, not a divider,” and would work with Democrats and end the divisive partisanship in Washington. In a not-so-subtle reference to the Lewinsky affair, he promised to restore “honor and dignity” to the presidency. He talked openly about how he had overcome his own alcoholism and about his born-again Christian faith. He was a surprisingly strong campaigner in spite of his tendency to mangle the English language with statements like, “families is where our nation finds hope, where wings take dreams.”
Two other candidates also entered the race: Ralph Nader, running on the Green Party ticket and critiquing the power that multinational corporations had over both Republicans and Democrats, and Patrick Buchanan, running a conservative and antiimmigrant campaign on Ross Perot’s Reform Party ticket. Although Nader and Buchanan might take crucial votes away from either candidate, no one gave them a chance of winning. In addition, several other candidates representing fringe parties entered the contest; however, they posed little threat even to siphon away votes from the major contenders.
As the polls closed on November 7, 2000, results for several states were still up in the air, but later that night, the deciding vote seemed to come down to Florida. Gore had clearly won a small majority in the overall vote—a final count of 50,992,335 for
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
856
Gore versus 50,455,156 for Bush (see Map 29-3). However, American presidential contests are decided by electoral votes, and at this point in the contest, whoever won Florida’s electoral vote would win the presidency. At one point, the major TV networks, using exit polls, announced that Gore had carried Florida. Later in the evening, they backed off. At around 2:00 a.m. they announced that Bush had won. Gore called Bush to congratulate him and was about to make a public concession speech. Then as new data came in, he called Bush a second time to say that any announcement was premature. By midmorning on Wednesday, November 8, everyone agreed that the election was too close to call. It would stay that way for the next 36 days.
Both campaigns assembled teams of attorneys to challenge votes and demand a Florida recount. Problems with Florida’s election procedures became apparent. Some African-American voters had been intimidated or turned away from the polls. In other places where votes were counted by punch cards fed into voting machines, cards with “hanging chads,” that is, cards that were not punched all the way through, were not counted, and in these places, the Gore team demanded a hand count. When Gore asked
29.1
29.2
293
	Electoral Vote (%)	Popular Vote (%)
GEORGE W. BUSH
271 50,456,169 (Republican)	(50.5)	(48.0,
		S0.996.H6
(Democrat)		
MAP 29-3 The Election of 2000. The presidential election of 2000 reflected how deeply divided the United States had become.The Northeast and West leaned Democratic, and the whole of the nation's midsection plus the South leaned Republican.
for a recount in four counties where the errors seemed especially glaring, the Bush lawyers challenged him in court. After the Florida Supreme Court sided with Gore, the Bush team took the<ase to the U.S. Supreme Court. On December 12, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5 to 4 decision that a recount in only four counties violated the equal protection of the law and that, given the time that had elapsed, all recounts in Florida must cease. The next day Gore conceded the election though he said he disagreed with the court’s decision “with every fiber of my being.” All five of the justices who voted to end the recount had been appointed by Reagan and Herbert Walker Bush (often referred to as “Bush, Sr.” to distinguish him from George W. Bush). The other four justices were scathing in their dissent. Ihe court’s senior justice John Paul Stevens, who had been appointed by Gerald Ford, said, “Although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this year’s Presidential election, the identity of the loser is perfectly clear. It is the Nation’s confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law.”
29.2
Quick Review Were Clinton's high approval ratings justified, based on his domestic and foreign policy accomplishments? Why or why not?
TECHNOLOGY DOMINATES AN ERA
29.3
Analyze the changes in technology and their impact on U.S. culture.
While Americans battled over elections and a host of social issues, a small group of Americans were transforming the world in a very different way. In the 1990s, computer use and technological innovation—from connections to the Internet to the use of cell phones—became widespread in the United States.
The Birth of New Technologies
During World War II, the military sought ways to speed the mathematical calculations to send a shell in exactly the right direction to hit an enemy target. These first computers were exactly what the name implied: machines that computed distance, velocity, and air pressure, to get a shot where it was intended to go. After the war, the U.S. Army’s 1946 ENIAC computer, known as the “giant brain,” performed ballistic calculations in
Chapter 29 A New World Order
857
A
The ENIAC computer, created in 1946 and huge by later standards, allowed the army more computational possibilities than ever before imagined.
30 minutes that had taken 12 hours for humans to perform. With its 17,468 vacuum tubes, it was also the largest electronic apparatus on the planet. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, similar large mainframe computers became common throughout American military bases, universities, and industry.
A whole series of postwar inventions made possible the move from large mainframe computers to personal computers. In 1947, the Bell Labs invented transistors that could replace bulky and unreliable vacuum tubes. In 1958, Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments found a way to construct a transistor and the circuitry needed to launch the pocket calculator. In 1968, Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore founded Intel to market a microprocessor that was key to personal computers. The computer giants of the day—Burroughs, Univac, NCR Corporation, Control Data Corporation, and Honeywell—dismissed Intel. Within a decade, Intel would outpace all of them.
In January 1975, the first personal computer, the MITS Altair 8800, went on the market. The MITS company promised investors it would sell at least two hundred Altair computers. It quickly sold several thousand. The Altair had its problems. MITS shipped the computer as a kit, and the buyer needed to assemble it. One early purchaser, Steve Dompier of Berkeley, California, reported enthusiastically that his Altair had arrived “in the mail at 10 a.m. and 30 hours later it was up and running with only one bug in the memory.” Not everyone, however, had 30 hours to dedicate to making the new computer work. Those who did manage to successfully assemble their computers quickly realized the Altair’s second problem: it didn’t actually do much on its own. With no keyboard, no screen, and no disk drive, the Altair consisted of a case, a series of switches, and lights. It could do some things—solve mathematical problems as well as keep and sort lists. Dompier even found a way to link it to a radio and turn data into music. This early computer was a machine for dedicated enthusiasts, not the general public, but dedicated enthusiasts liked it.
One especially enthusiastic group in the San Francisco Bay area called themselves the Homebrew Club. The Homebrew Club, self-described geeks, loved the new Altair. Most were hobbyists who just wanted to have fun with the machines. But they also had a political agenda. They were rebels against the large government, universities, and corporations that dominated society and used technology, especially the giant mainframe computers, to do so. Homebrew wanted something different—a modern world in which the individual with a personal computer was more powerful than the corporation or the military or the university with its giant computers. Ted Nelson, another Bay Area geek, wrote in his 1974 self-published Computer Lib/Dream Machines, “I would
858 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
The Apple II designed by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak had expanded computing capabalities for both personal and business use.
like to alert the reader, in no uncertain terms, that the time has come to be openly attentive and critical in observing and dealing with computer systems; and to transform criticism into action....THE PUBLIC DOES NOT HAVE TO TAKE WHAT’S BEING DISHED OUT.” A decade earlier, students had demonstrated in Berkeley with signs that said (mocking the instructions on cards then used in mainframe computers), Human Being: Do not bend, spindle, or mutilate.” According to Nelson, it was time to liberate the computer and put its power into everyone’s hands.
Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs were part of Homebrew. They decided that they should market their own kit that could outperform the Altair.
They sold their first Apple I computer in 1976. However, to accomplish all they wanted—to make the computer truly a popular device that everyone could use—they needed something simpler and easier than the Altair or the Apple I. Jobs studied the styling of popular European toasters and mixers in the kitchen department at Macy’s in San Francisco and designed the plastic case for what became the Apple II. The two also designed new uses for the Apple. The Apple II could be connected to a TV or a stand-alone screen and used to play computer games. It could be used for spreadsheets and word processing. Small businesses could do their own financial analysis.
Jobs and Wozniak also courted investors, including two Silicon Valley engineers, Mike Markkula and Michael Scott, who formed
the core of the new Apple Company that launched the Apple II computer in 1977. Apple was a huge success. Apple Computer’s revenue went from $800,000 in 1977 to $48,000,000 in 1979. That unbelievable start was only the beginning.
IBM, the largest of the computer companies, realized the money to be made in personal computers and was determined that “Big Blue,” as IBM was known, not be left behind. In the 1970s, IBM’s money and power came from its manufacture of office machines (the name International Business Machines actually meant something), including popular typewriters, and from leasing the large mainframe computers used by corporations and government agencies.
In the summer of 1980, IBM created a special task force independent of all the normal routines of the company to create a personal computer (PC), complete with operating system, that could compete head-to-head with Apple, and do so quickly. The task force did its work in 12 months, and the first IBM PC went on the market in August 1981. It was a huge hit. IBM made $43 million from its PC division in the first year, and the profits were soon in the billions.
The core of the IBM PC was Intel’s microprocessor, a power supply from Zenith, and printers from Epson. Even though IBM was one of the largest software companies in the world, the team also decided to find a different source for the software for the PC. They turned to a Seattle-based upstart known as Micro-soft (later simply Microsoft), led by computer enthusiasts Bill Gates and Paul Allen.
Gates and Allen had written a class-scheduling program for their own high school while students there. In 1975, Gates, like the people at Homebrew, became fasci-
nated with the Altair. He dropped out of Harvard and moved to Albuquerque, New Mexico, where the Altair was manufactured. He and Allen began writing software for the Altair and founded their company, Micro-soft, in April 1975. While Homebrew wanted to share all information freely, making personal computers part of a “people’s revolution,” Gates saw the potential for profit. He wrote a 1976 open letter condemning information sharing as “theft.” Software, Gates insisted, should be as closely held as any computer hardware. When the IBM team approached him, Gates assured them he could produce what they needed. He bought another operating system, the Quick and Dirty Operating System,” (QDOS), adapted it to the needs of the IBM PC, and renamed it the MS-DOS (or Microsoft Disk Operating System). Rather than sell the
Chapter 29 A New World Order 859
system to IBM, Gates licensed the MS-DOS system and received royalties on every IBM PC sold. The foundation was laid by 1980 to make Bill Gates the richest person on the planet within a decade.
By 1979, even before IBM set its team to work, Steve Jobs was looking for ways to improve the Apple II. He visited the research offices of the Xerox Corporation, Xerox PARC, which was something of a mecca to computer developers. The staff was intrigued but wary of the upstart Jobs. At Xerox, Jobs saw an engineer, Larry Tesler, working with a small box that he used to move a cursor around on a computer screen. Tesler called it a “mouse,” and with it, he could click on icons, open and close “windows” on the screen, and give the machine commands. The mouse was slow and bulky. The engineers at Xerox were not quite sure what to do with it. Soon, Xerox withdrew from the personal computer business—though it made a fortune selling printers that linked to PCs made by others. But Jobs felt like he had seen the future. He set a team to work designing a very different and more user-friendly mouse, and the Macintosh computer that went on sale in 1981 transformed the industry with its easy-to-operate system guided by a handheld mouse that replaced the need to key in commands.
The Y2K Scare of January 1,2000
As the nation prepared for the calendar change from 1999 to January 1, 2000, people were strangely preoccupied with their computers. Reporting on the ABC News, Forrest Sawyer said:
Surf through the Internet these days and you keep coming across a strange word, TEOTWAWKI. It stands for “the end of the world as we know it,” and it refers to the effect of a tiny, seemingly innocuous computer glitch, a tiny glitch a lot of people say could literally blow the lights out on civilization.
The fear of what was sometimes called the “Y2K problem” or the “Millennium bug” was very real and illustrated how completely the United States had become dependent on computers by 2000.
The Y2K problem was relatively simple. Beginning in the 1970s, computer programmers began using a two-digit code for the date. Rather than take up additional memory for 1978, they shortened the space for the year to two digits. Everyone—and every machine—knew that “78” meant 1978. But as 2000 got closer, some computer researchers began to get very nervous. If on New Year’s Day 2000 the computers suddenly thought it was 1900, who knew what might happen in term of systems malfunctioning or shutting down.
The threat was very real. The U.S. Department of Defense worried about crucial information systems shutting down. Banks worried that all information on their accounts could be lost. Electric companies worried that the electric grid, now completely computer controlled and monitored, could shut down. Hospitals worried that everything from heart monitors and breathing machines to the electricity and air conditioning in the operating rooms could stop. Internet-based businesses might not be able to operate. Ultimately, very little went wrong. Monitoring equipment in nuclear power plants in Japan failed but was repaired within a few hours. Bus ticket validation machines in Australia failed. In several countries, some cell phones stopped taking messages. In the United States, slot machines in Delaware stopped and the Naval Observatory clock briefly said that it was January 1, 19100. The problems, however, hardly resulted in the end of the world.
Some insisted that the whole Y2K crisis had been a distraction. Others knew how much work it had taken to avoid a crisis. Paul Saffo, director of the Institute for the Future in Menlo Park, California, said, “This was not hype. This was not software consultants trying to create a full employment act for themselves. This really could have screwed up our lives, and you know, a whole bunch of little geeks saved us.” David Eddy, a computer programmer in Boston who first coined the term “Y2K crisis,” said, “Ihe reason nothing bad happened was that so many people put so much work into it.”
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present

860
American Voices
Peter de Jager and Richard Bergeon,
Countdown Y2K: Business Survival Planning for the Year 2000,1999
s more people realized the seriousness of what could happen on January 7, 2000, if the nation's increasingly networked computers all responded as if the date were January 7, 1900, many people began to worry. Many publications raised the alarm and in the end the problem was addressed though what some in retrospect saw as a hype others believed was a true crisis averted by the hard work of many experts. In any case, books like this one were very popular in the late 7 990s and spoke to the increasing public dependence on computers in many aspects of people's lives, something that had not been true even a few years earlier.
Introduction: Houston, We Have a Problem
It's New Year's Day 2000 and you're headed to your best friend's house to watch football. You're in a hurry because you don't want to miss kickoff, and you have to stop at the nearest cash machine first, because you promised to bring the beer. But instead of cash, the ATM commandeers your card, rudely informing you that it has expired.
Furious, but knowing you won't get much help on a holiday, you head to the nearest 7-11 intending to pay for your refreshments with a credit card. Pulling up to the store, you think a lot of people have the same idea, because there's a long line at the checkout counter. But the problem is not a run on beer; instead, you find out, the cash register is not working. The word, as it reaches you at the end of the line, is that the cash register is computer-based and requires a valid date to start up. And for some reason, it won't. "Some reason" is the Year 2000 problem, Y2K for short.
The preceding hypothetical—but probable—scenario is just the tip of the iceberg, and if collective public denial continues, it is an iceberg that will sink titanic computer systems worldwide. Like the unheeded warnings of disaster on the oceanliner Titanic, the alert to the Year 2000 problem has been sounded—on television, in newspapers, magazines, and newsletters, and via the Internet. Often, however, it has been defined simply as the inability of computers to calculate properly with 00—two zeros—signifying the new century. Further, media coverage frequently couches the issue in computer jargon, making it seem irrelevant to anyone other than programmers and information systems managers. The truth is, the Year 2000 problem will affect each of us, personally and professionally.
Source: Peter de Jager and Richard Bergeon, Countdown Y2K: Business Survival Planning for the Year 2000, Boston: John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How do de Jager and Bergeon describe the Y2K problem?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In retrospect we know that the problems described in the article did not happen. Reading the chapter in 1999 how might different readers have responded? What might have led different people to respond differently?
A lot of money was spent on Y2K preparation, perhaps $100 billion in the United States and $300 billion worldwide. Old computers and operating systems were replaced. Whatever the other results, the preparation for Y2K illustrated that, beyond a doubt, by 1999 the United States and the world had become deeply dependent on computers, the Internet, the World Wide Web, and related technology, most of which had not even existed 29 or 30 years earlier.
A
Connected Nation By the 1990s, the personal computers that were being produced by Apple and IBM as well as the systems such as those made by Microsoft that made them useful, were providing people with the ability to read, write, calculate, and do much more at speeds never before thought possible. Nevertheless, for the most part, these amazing machines each still stood alone. As early as the 1940s, dreamers like Vannevar Bush, founder of the National Science Foundation, were imagining a day when, through connected systems, “The patent attorney has on call the millions of issued patents... .The physician, puzzled by a patients reactions...runs rapidly through analogous case histories....” But Bush’s dream remained just a dream for almost 50 years. Only in the 1990s did it become possible for most people to make meaningful connections between individual
Chapter 29 A New World Order 861
Internet
The system of interconnected computers and servers that allows the exchange of e-mail, posting of websites, and other means of instant communication.
World Wide Web (WWW)
Since 1991, a protocol for information use on the Internet.
862 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New
computers—to share information, seek information, and combine information in heretofore unimaginable ways. Those connections were made possible by the development of the Internet, a massive network of smaller networks joined together. Actually, many separate developments created the Internet.
President Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara were preoccupied with the question of how the president could maintain communication with the nation’s far-flung military installations if a nuclear war actually happened. Without communication, the threat of massive retaliation in the case of a nuclear attack was a fiction. In the 1960s, however, government planners knew that a nuclear blast would cripple existing radio communications and knock out the nation’s highly centralized telephone network. To solve the problem, the Pentagon turned to researchers at the RAND Corporation, and a RAND employee, Paul Baran, led the team that would solve the problem. A decade later, on August 27, 1976, in the parking lot of Zott’s Beer Garden near Stanford University, a team of Stanford researchers sent a message from a computer in a van to another computer they had placed inside the bar. The message was received, and the first data transmission had taken place over a network. Further developments led to a much more sophisticated system.
A next crucial step in connecting computers was the development of the World Wide Web, which was achieved by Tim Berners-Lee. Berners-Lee was an English physicist working at the international physics lab in Switzerland, known as CERN, where he noted that the various scientists from different countries could not share information from computer to computer. He wanted to solve that problem. His goal was to find a way to connect computers and share information, lots of information.
In 1990, Berners-Lee found a way to create a common system so the information within files could easily be shared from computer to computer. He created a language for formatting files in hypertext so they could be read in the same way by the sending and receiving computers, and he called the language Hypertext Markup Language, or HTML. In addition, he developed a method of moving files of information, which he called the World Wide Web (WWW), although in the beginning, it connected only the computers within the laboratories at CERN. By the end of 1990, the World Wide Web was up and running within the small research community at CERN. By August
1991,	it was being made available at select Internet sites around the world, and by
1992,	it was being used by more and more people who were creating their own websites to send and receive hypertext information through the Internet.
In the early 1990s, the WWW was still primitive, but many also saw it as revolutionary. Berners-Lee made another crucial decision. Although he could have gotten rich off of his invention, he insisted that the World Wide Web would be free. On April 30, 1993, CERN announced that anyone, anywhere in the world could use the Web without payment of royalties or legal constraints. The information superhighway, as Tennessee Senator Al Gore would call it, was launched. (Gore did not “invent” the Internet but he did coin the term “information superhighway” in 1990 and sponsored legislation to support it in Congress.)
People needed the right software on their own computers to connect to the World Wide Web. One of the earliest softwares, and the first to be available at no cost, was produced by Marc Andreesen, a 21-year-old computer science major at the University of Illinois. In January 1993, he posted an announcement that said, “By the power vested in me by nobody in particular, alpha/beta version of 0.5 of NCSA’s Motif-based information system and World Wide Web browser, X Mosaic, is hereby released, Cheers, Marc.” Andreesen then moved to California and was recruited by venture capitalist Jim Clark to develop a more sophisticated connection system, and in October 1994, Netscape was launched as a browser. Soon thousands of people in the United States and around the world were connecting to the Internet for the first time using Netscape Navigator to get to the Netscape home page and from there to the world. Other systems, America Online (AOL) and Yahoo!, soon followed. Before long, Bill Gates was leading Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Microsoft in the development and distribution of its own Web browser. By 1998, over 45 million people quite a jump from 15,000 in 1990—were connected to the World Wide Web. People could shop, do research, listen to music, or tour the world, without leaving the comfort of their own homes.
E-mail messages began replacing telephone calls and office memos in the late 1990s. Ray Tomlinson, a researcher working at the Defense Department inaugurated the use of @ as the core of an e-mail address. In the 1990s, people embraced the opportunity to send and receive messages at times of their own convenience rather than to have to answer the telephone. With the growth of television in the 1950s, some had worried that the printed word was in decline. After 2000, the reliance on text certainly saw a resurgence, even if in abbreviated form, as e-mail messages replaced telephone calls as the prime source of communication among Americans.
The Dot.com Bubble and Its Eventual Burst
If Y2K illustrated the degree to which almost every aspect of society had become dependent on computer technology by 2000, the bursting of the dot.com bubble illustrated how easy it was to inflate the value of every computer-related enterprise. Just as the world of electronic communications was being born in the 1990s, many people decided that the key to making a fortune was investing in the enterprise. As had happened many times before (see Chapter 22 on the stock market crash of 1929), overea-ger investors created a bubble that eventually burst.
In March 2000, an article in Barrons, the respected business magazine, asked, “When will the Internet Bubble burst?” A week later, Business Week ran a story on Internet stocks called “Wall Street’s Hype Machine.” Investors, some of whom were already beginning to have their own worries, paid attention. At the end of March and all through April 2000, stocks in high technology companies fell dramatically. Between March 10 and April 14, Yahoo! fell from 178 to 116. By the end of December 2000, nearly every technology company was down significantly. Some, like Amazon, com, recovered. Others did not. The value of specific parts of the new electronic world had shrunk, but the new electronic order was just beginning.
Google Becomes a Verb
In September 1998, two Stanford University graduate students, Larry Page and Sergey Brin, launched a new company in a garage in Menlo Park, California. They called their company Google. Page and Brin first met at Stanford in 1995, and by 1996, they had decided to search for and find information through the still-new World Wide Web. Other search engines predated Google, and others rose to challenge its dominance, but it quickly became the leader. As early as December 1998, a computer magazine was reporting Googles “uncanny knack” for producing good information very quickly, and by 2001, one could search for information on Google in 26 languages.
By December 2001, Page and Brin’s company had scanned or indexed 3 billion webpages, almost 80 percent of the total then in existence. And as the number of webpages grew, Google kept scanning and indexing. When someone in any corner of the globe typed a question or a name or a topic into the google.com search page, a series of interconnected computers at Google headquarters in Mountain View, California, scanned the data and presented a list of websites to the searcher. With the advent of Google, virtually all of the knowledge available anywhere on the Internet was available at the click of a few key strokes to everyone, not just computer geeks with unlimited time and patience.
Google never charged for its services, which along with its speed, was a key to its popularity. The company’s main source of revenue came from advertisements. Hotels in London may pay to get top billing when someone does a search of London, while sporting goods companies may pay for top billing when a search is done for sneakers.” In the years after its founding, Google kept up the rapid pace of growth and change. In 2004, Google launched Google Books. The company signed agreements
29J
292
29.3
Google revolutionized the ability to search for information on the internet through its powerful search engine.
Chapter 29 A New World Order 863
with a number of prominent libraries, including Harvard, Stanford, the University of Michigan, Oxford University, the Library of Congress, and the New York Public Library to digitize all of their holdings. The books whose copyrights had expired would be made available online. Books still under copyright—which included most books—would have only small selections available, considered fair use, and readers would be referred to the publisher for more. However, publishers were nervous about the fact that the whole book would be stored in Google’s electronic archives, and in 2005, the Association of American Publishers sued the company for violation of copyright laws. In response, John L. Hennessy, the president of Stanford University and a member of Google’s board of directors, said, “We need to rethink our copyright framework that is still a remnant of the past.” The nature of copyrights and, indeed, the printed page, would be in for dramatic changes.
The Latest Technology—Winners, Losers, and Change Agents
Soon after 2000, the fast-paced technological changes were producing some clear winners: companies like Google and Microsoft and the thousands of engineers and inventors who worked in places like Silicon Valley in California or Seattle, Washington. In addition, there were also clear losers.
When the Sony Walkman cassette tape player appeared in 1979, it seemed part of a never-ending expansion of the music industry. People could buy music and listen as they walked or worked. By 2001, however, the music industry was in deep trouble. New technologies gave consumers the power to simply download the music they wanted, at no cost. In the 1990s, the bestselling album sold 15 million copies. In 1999 alone, the music industry reported profits of $14.6 billion, but in retrospect, that point was the peak year for the industry’s profits. That number would fall to $6.3 billion in 2009. It was just too easy to download music, share it, and give it away. In 2001, representatives of the music industry were successful in a lawsuit closing Napster, one of the first vehicles for downloading music that had been launched in 1999, but the move was a public relations disaster because other technology for downloading made it easier and easier even without the help of Napster. If the industry was going to survive after 2001, then it would need to find a new way to create, market, and profit from music products.
Newspapers went through similar losses. After 2000, newspaper advertising, which generates most of newspaper revenue, fell dramatically, as did the actual sales of newspapers. Circulation kept dropping for most newspapers and some, like the Los Angeles Times and the Boston Globe, lost perhaps a third of all subscribers between 2000 and 2010. Many of these papers began small online versions, but readers had already become accustomed to accessing other news sites that had been designed specifically for online readers. Newspapers have yet to recover, if they ever will.
Many people also began to worry about the loss of privacy that can accompany growing information technology. Certainly, Google held a lot of information, not just on products but on people who search for information. E-mail was much easier to hack into and read than traditional letters or telephone calls, and the federal protection of privacy, especially in letters sent through the U.S. mail, did not apply to much of the new technology. Mobile phones made it easy to call from anywhere, but they also made it easy for people to track anyone’s location. Privacy, as civil libertarians had traditionally defined it, was a fast-changing matter.
In the decades after 2001, technology kept changing the way people lived their lives and interacted with others. A world without e-mail or without the ability to search the World Wide Web or listen to music or follow one’s friends on Facebook became virtually unimaginable. Yet before the 1990s, such a world did not exist. In that decade, the foundation for the technological future was set.
Quick Review Is the expansion of technology beneficial to people, businesses, and/or governments? Why or why not?
293
864 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
CONCLUSION
In 1989, the Cold War came to an end and “a new world order” began to take shape. After Reagans second term, when George H.W. Bush, a foreign policy expert, took office in 1989, he was well-positioned to see the United States through the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War. But as soon as the Cold War had ended, other international crises immediately began to preoccupy the Bush administration. During his term in office, Bush sent U.S. troops to Iraq to protect the independence of Kuwait, ordered the overthrow of Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega, and sent peacekeeping troops to both Somalia and Yugoslavia. Amid this international turmoil, the Bush administration also had to confront the increasing threat of al-Qaeda and other nonstate terrorist organizations.
While Bush focused on international issues, the U.S. economy fell into a recession, and when he raised taxes, despite an earlier promise not to do so, the conservative wing of the Republican Party abandoned him. Division within the Republican Party and the troubled economy allowed Democratic candidate Bill Clinton, whose campaign team motto was It s the economy, stupid,” to defeat Bush in his bid for reelection.
Clinton focused on two primary issues early in his administration: the economy and the nation’s health care system. He managed, with the help of a Democratic-controlled Congress, to balance the federal budget, lower the national debt, and secure approval for the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), but his health care plan faltered before it reached the U.S. Congress for a vote. Two years into Clinton’s first term, Republicans took control of the House of Representatives, forcing him to further moderate his positions. In his remaining 6 years in office, Clinton worked with Republicans to limit some budget cuts, end the nation’s traditional welfare system, and pass the Defense of Marriage Act. Although Clinton faced impeachment stemming from charges that he had lied under oath about a sexual affair, he kept his office.
The 1990s concluded with one of the strangest presidential elections in American history. It took over one month and a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court to determine that George W. Bush, not Al Gore, would succeed Clinton as president.
With the rise of new international issues as well as economic and social issues at home, dramatic developments in technology launched a new information era. Personal computers, which first became available in the 1980s, became commonplace in the 1990s. New companies like Apple, Microsoft, and Google emerged, and existing companies like IBM and Xerox adapted to changing technologies. In the 1990s, developments such as the Internet and the World Wide Web allowed people to connect and communicate at speeds never before thought possible. These advances also ushered in an era of speculation among overeager investors. Technology stocks grew steadily throughout the 1990s, but, in March 2000, the tech bubble burst and many people lost jobs and savings. By the end of the decade, technology had become so pervasive in American life that many feared a catastrophic Y2K problem if computers malfunctioned on January 1, 2000. In addition, concern grew about the computer’s impact on a range of existing institutions from the music industry to books and newspapers as well as the impact of computers on personal privacy. Nevertheless, by 2001, it was clear that the transformation of life as a result of technology was here to stay.
CHAPTER E
How did changes in the 1990s connect the United States to the rest of the world to an extent unimagined at the beginning or in the middle of the 1900s?
Chapter 29 A New World Order 865
Chapter 29 Chapter Review
29.1
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION,
1989-1993________________________ Explain the New World Order that George Bush described.
Review Questions
1.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the global situation faced by the United States in 1980 and 1990. What challenges and opportunities did the changed world present to the Bush administration?
2.	Contextualization
How did the power of conservatives within the Republican Party shape the Bush presidency?
3.	Historical Interpretation
What do the Thomas nomination hearings, the Rodney King incident, and the O.J. Simpson trial indicate about the state of race relations in the United States at the end of the 1900s?
THE CLINTON PRESIDENCY
Analyze the impact of the Clinton presidency and the Clinton-Gingrich conflict on the country.
Review Questions
4.	Contextualization
Why did Clinton feel that it was important to emphasize his departure from traditional Democratic ideas?
29.2
29.3
5.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the American political landscape in 1976 and 1996. What explains the differences you note?
6.	Construct an Argument
How would you explain Clinton’s high public opinion ratings throughout his impeachment proceedings? What does his high ratings tell you about how the public viewed Clinton and his congressional opponents?
TECHNOLOGY DOMINATES AN ERA______________________________
Analyze the changes in technology and their impact on U.S. culture.
Review Questions
7.	Synthesis
What role did new technology play in producing the prosperity of the 1990s? What other factors were important in this regard?
8.	Construct an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: “The advent of the Internet was the most important advance in communications technology since the invention of the printing press.”
9.	Historical Interpretation
Who were the economic winners and losers of the communications technology revolution?
866 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
The September 11,2001, terror attack on the World Trade Center in New York and
the Pentagon in Washington, DC, was a tragedy that shaped American politics for a
decade	CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
the Present
Tuesday morning on September 11, 2001, dawned clear and beautiful on the East Coast of the United States. President Bush was in Florida, reading to a class of second graders as part of his effort to get the No Child Left Behind legislation through Congress. Most Americans were going about their business at the beginning of another workweek as memories of summer vacations faded. At 7:59 a.m. American Airlines Flight 11 took off from Bostons Logan International Airport bound for Los Angeles. In the minutes that followed, United Airlines Flight 93 left Newark for San Francisco; American Flight 77 left Washington, DC, for Los Angeles; and United Flight 175 left Boston for Los Angeles. None of those four flights made it to their intended destination.
On each of the four planes, just minutes after takeoff, hijackers took control of the flight using box cutters—then legal to carry onto a plane—as weapons. Following existing procedures, designed for hijackers of an earlier era who often sought ransom or political concessions, airline crews yielded to the hijackers, and then quickly realized the new destinations. As terrified crew and passengers used cell phones to call relatives and authorities, the planes turned back toward the East Coast. At 8:46 a.m., American Flight 11 crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center. Seventeen minutes later, United Flight 175 crashed into the South Tower of the Trade Center.
Demonstrate an understanding of the most recent history of the United States from September 11,2001, to the present.
THE IMPACT OF SEPTEMBER
11,2001 Analyze the impact of 9/11 on the nation and on the presidency of George Bush and the impact of Bush administration policies around the world.
HURRICANE KATRINA AND ITS AFTERMATH
Explain the impact of Hurricane Katrina on the Gulf Coast.
THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF
2008 Explain the costs and consequences of the 2008 financial crisis.
NEW LIBERALS, NEW CONSERVATIVES
Analyze the most recent political developments in the United States.
30.1
30.2
30.3
30.4
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 867
30.1
Significant Dates
■HI 2001
M2
WJ
| 2002
'IO \
—j 20Q3
2004
2005
2006
2008
2009
2010
2012
2013
George W. Bush inaugurated as U.S. president; Apple iTunes and Wikipedia launched
President Bush signs tax cut legislation
Terrorist attack on World Trade Center and Pentagon
United States installs new interim government in Afghanistan
Bush signs No Child Left Behind education legislation
United States invades Iraq, overthrows Saddam Hussein
Abuse of Iraqi prisoners in Abu Ghraib prison comes to light The 9/11 Commission Report issued Bush defeats John Kerry to be reelected
Hurricane Katrina hits New Orleans and the Gulf Coast
After Republican election losses, Rumsfeld replaced as Secretary of Defense
In a sign of growing financial trouble Bear Stearns absorbed by JP Morgan
Financial crisis including Lehman Brothers bankruptcy
Barack Obama defeats John McCain
Barack Obama inaugurated as president of the United States
Republican Scott Brown wins Ted Kennedy's seat in the U.S. Senate
Republicans win majority of House of Representatives
Obama reelected for a second term
U.S.
Supreme Court rules part of Defense of Marriage Act unconstitutional in United States v. Windsor 30.1
At 9:37 a.m., American Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon. By this time, passengers on United Flight 93 had learned from cell phone calls that they were part of a massive terrorist plot. As the plane headed for Washington, DC, heroic passengers overpowered the hijackers and the plane crashed in a field in Somerset County, Pennsylvania.
Many acts of heroism occurred on that chaotic morning. Betty Ong, a flight attendant on American Airlines Flight 11 stayed on her cell phone, reporting minute by minute until the plane crashed into the World Trade Center. In New York City, Nick Gerstle, a technician for Verizon, knew CPR and thought he could be helpful at Ground Zero—the now horrific site where the twin towers of the Trade Center had stood. In the midst of the rubble, he and some firefighters found two trapped New York City police officers. He heard the officers say, “Please! Don’t let us die! And they didn’t. The two officers were among the few rescued from the collapsed buildings. Julia Martinez and Margaret Espinoza were paraprofessionals—teacher aids—at the High School for Leadership and Public Service that was only a block away from the World Trade Center. They began moving two wheelchair-bound students out of the chaos, found their way blocked by debris and, with the aid of two strangers, simply picked up the girls and carried them to safety blocks away. New Yorkers, Pentagon employees, passengers on the flights, and average Americans did heroic things. That day changed history as few others had. Ihe focus of this chapter is on the decade and more after that tragic day during which public and personal events were shadowed by what came to be called simply 9/11.
THE IMPACT OF SEPTEMBER
11,2001______________________________________________ Analyze the impact of 9/11 on the nation and presidency of George Bush and the impact of Bush administration policies around the world.
In the first moments and hours after the horrific crashes, no one knew what to make of the attack on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. On first hearing the news on radio or TV, most people had the same reaction as Florence Engoran, who worked in the South Tower of the World Trade Center. When she arrived at her office on the 55th floor someone said, “A small plane hit the other building.” She remembered, “I wasn’t especially upset by the news,” and tended to agree with her coworker who said, “Oh, just sit down, let’s keep working. We have to get out some focus reports.” Within minutes, however, as she saw flames and heard another crash, Engoran realized that something much more serious was happening. Although she was 5 months pregnant, Engoran headed for the stairs and walked down the 55 flights. Before she made it to the bottom, the lights were off and the stairwell was filled with dust, but she made it. Most of those working in the buildings made it out. But many did not. Handicapped people who could not walk down the stairs were stuck. People on the higher floors could not get past the fires. Some 78 police officers and 400 firefighters who had responded to the emergencies remained in the buildings trying to evacuate people when the structures collapsed. It all happened very fast. At 9:58 a.m., just 1 hour after the crash, the South Tower of the World Trade Center collapsed floor by floor, showering a wide area with rubble. Thirty minutes later, the North Tower also collapsed. What had been two of the tallest buildings in the world that morning were now simply a giant hole in the ground.
The worst violence on United States soil since the Civil War had just taken place. Nearly 3,000 people died—246 passengers on the planes; 2,600 at the World Trade Center, including workers in the two towers, police and fire rescue workers, and a few unlucky passersby; and 125 people at the Pentagon. The fear, loss, anger, and fortitude generated from that day would shape a new reality for the nation.
At 9:30 a.m., the Federal Aviation Administration grounded all flights within the United States. For the week that followed, the skies would be clear of everything but high-flying military planes. Airports would be eerily quiet. At a little after 1:00 p.m. that Tuesday, President Bush, just 9 months into his first term, addressed the nation
868
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
The twisted ruins of the World Trade Center in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11,2001.
from an Air Force base in Louisiana, telling people that massive security measures were in effect and that the United States would “hunt down and punish those responsible for these cowardly acts,” though at that point no one was quite sure who they were. At 8:30 p.m., President Bush spoke to the nation for a second time, this time from the Oval Office, asking for prayers for the families and friends of the victims and again promising retaliatory action. Ground Zero was still a mass of burning rubble and would be for weeks. The Pentagon fire was contained, but not under control. The nation tried to make sense of what had happened.
Finding the Terrorists—al-Qaeda, the Taliban, Afghanistan
In the initial confusion of the morning of September 11, no one was quite sure who was behind the attack. By early afternoon, George Tenet, the director of the CIA, informed President Bush that while the agency was still investigating, all the evidence pointed to an attack by al-Qaeda, ordered by its leader Osama bin Laden. By late that evening, when the president met with what he then called his “war council,” they all agreed that plans needed to be developed to punish not only the perpetrators of the 9/11 attack but any who harbored them.
On September 20, President Bush spoke to a joint session of Congress. He said, “Tonight, we are a country awakened to danger.” He said of the government of Afghanistan that “They will hand over the terrorists, or they will share their fate.” And he told the rest of the world, “Either you are with us, or you are with the terrorists.” There would be no neutrals in the war on terror. The president said that the war was with terrorists, not with Islam. He insisted, “The enemy of America is not our many Muslim friends. It is not our many Arab friends. Our enemy is a radical network of terrorists, and every government that supports them.” Nevertheless, the militant tone of the speech, while reassuring some, worried many. In the immediate aftermath of the attacks, international support and sympathy for the United States was high. Even nations long hostile to the United States such as Syria were expressing support. But with Bush s response, some of the support began to fade.
9/11 attack
The attack of September 11,2001 on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon organized by al-Qaeda.
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 869
30.1
BO ? I
American Voices
“9/11 Memories,” Michael Muskal, September 11,2013
veryone who lived through the day had their own experience of 9/11, one they will not forget. Twelve years later a Los Angeles 303 I Times reporter looked back on his own memories and those of j	others who contacted him.
I
Even 12 years later, the events of Sept. 11, 2001, sear 30 J j	Americans' memories.
___J	In comments posted on latimes.com, people remember the
tragic events of the day -- the moments, both good and bad, heroic and fearful, that are summed up by the numerals 9/11.
It was early morning when the first airplane hit one of the towers of the World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan. On the East Coast, commuters were rushing to their jobs, schools were filling with educators and students. It seemed an ordinary day until 8:46 a.m., when it wasn't.
"On 9/11/2001 I was having a national sales meeting in our offices at the World Trade Center. We had visitors from Chicago, California and New Orleans. Everyone was looking forward to getting together to recharge," writes Keith Webster of Malibu.
"At 8:45 a.m. while standing in our boardroom looking at the Statue of Liberty in the south harbor, all hell was about to break loose. We heard a pop then a swoosh. A stream of debris crossed the sky. It looked like a ticker tape parade but only a few thousand feet higher.
"In an instant, I knew what was happening, in my mind's eye an image of a terrorist walking onto my floor with a bomb vest flashed. I could see my lobby vaporized and in flames."
Webster also writes about his eventual rescue by heroic responders.
Maralynn Mash of Ft. Lauderdale, Fla., says she was at an elementary school near the World Trade Center that day.
"The children were headed toward the basement for safety when police and fire officials came into the building thinking it was empty... .But then we were directed to run ... run for your lives. Teachers and students, under the guidance of an incredibly able principal, ran ahead of the second 'cloud' north on Greenwich... .What I remember is a day of bravery, a year of dedication in response to an act of cowardice. So very proud to be a New Yorker and an American."
On the West Coast, people were just waking up; many watched the tragedy in New York unfold on television. Instead
of the usual fodder of second-day news, lifestyle features and celebrity pomp, viewers saw the horror of the deadliest terrorist attack on U.S. soil.
"The images of the towers crashing and exploding gave me a sense of insecurity that something like this could happen in downtown Los Angeles," writes Maricela of La Puente.
"I remember arriving at Raymond A. Villa Intermediate School in Santa Ana, Calif. It was an ordinary day. I hung out with my friends for a little bit, headed to first period, sat at my desk, the usual. I was in sixth grade at the time. Around the middle of class ... my teacher put the TV on," writes Lene De Leon, now of San Antonio.
"I will never forget the images or the confusion I felt upon seeing the videos replaying over and over again. I tried so hard not to cry for fear of being made fun of, but I was hurting for all those people and my country. Everything happening was so painful to watch. The second plane hitting, people desperate for help and waving white'flags'out of the windows, people jumping out of the windows, the towers falling. All the images were engraved in my memory and are still vivid."
They are etched onto the nation's soul nation too, and are freshly renewed every 9/11 as officials, relatives and mourners gather in New York, Pennsylvania and Washington. In all, nearly 3,000 people died.
As Kendra of Auburn, Ala., writes, "Mom said to me,'This day will be a day to remember for the rest of your life.'"
Source: Michael Muskal, "9/11 memories:'All hell was about to break loose'" Los Angeles Times, September 11,2013.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What different emotions do people remember when recalling
9/11 ? Have the emotions changed in the 12 years between the event and when this article was written?
2.	Comparison
In what ways were the memories of those who were in or near the World Trade Center similar to and in what ways different from the memories of others who lived much farther away but shared the same moment in the nation's history?
870
By the time Bush spoke, CIA and U.S. Army forces had been dispatched to Pakistan and Uzbekistan to prepare for an attack on Afghanistan, whose Taliban government was protecting bin Laden and al-Qaeda. In early October, the United States attacked sites within Afghanistan while building on-the-ground alliances with Afghan warlords who were hostile to the Taliban regime. Soon, U.S. ground forces, allied with the warlords, began an assault on the Taliban government. On November 9, the northern city of Mazar-e-Sharif fell to the U.S.-led coalition forces, and a few days later, the Taliban government fled the capital of Kabul. By early December, the United States and its local allies were in control of the country, and on December 22,
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Hamid Karzai, a leader of one of the anti-Taliban factions, was installed as the new leader of Afghanistan. For the most part, however, the Taliban leaders had escaped.
Many Afghans celebrated the defeat of the austere and tyrannical Taliban even as they kept a wary eye on the Americans and on each other. Late in 2001, U.S.-backed forces attacked the remaining al-Qaeda strongholds in a region of mountainous caves known as Tora Bora. Perhaps a quarter of all al-Qaeda and Taliban operatives were killed or captured, but the rest, including bin Laden and his chief lieutenant Ayman al-Zawahiri, escaped into the lightly governed provinces on the Pakistani side of the border from which they continued to operate with considerable freedom. The United States did not track bin Laden down until May 2011, almost 10 years later.
In the aftermath of the attack, President Bush, under considerable pressure from families of victims, agreed to appoint a special commission to study the 9/11 attack and make recommendations regarding future policy. The chair of the commission, former Republican governor of New Jersey Thomas Kean, and vice chair, Lee H. Hamilton, former Democratic representative from Indiana, were careful to say, “We write with the benefit and handicap of hindsight. We are mindful of the danger of being unjust to men and women who made choices in conditions of uncertainty and in circumstances over which they often had little control.” Nevertheless, they noted significant mistakes. They reported that while presidents and CIA directors are inundated with information, a lot of information had pointed to a possible large scale al-Qaeda attack. As early as December 1998, the CIA’s Presidential Daily Brief for
Bill Clinton said, “_suggests bin Laden and his allies are preparing for attacks on
U.S., including an aircraft hijacking.” A report to George W. Bush on August 6, 2001, included a detailed note headlined, “bin Laden Determined to Strike in US.” They also noted that the United States was unprepared for dealing with an attack. Although Air Force planes were launched after the first plane crashed into the World Trade Center, the pilots had no clear instructions, and the commission had great doubts that, if the passengers had not caused the fourth plane to crash in Pennsylvania, it could have been stopped before reaching Washington, DC. “The most important failure,” they concluded, “was one of imagination. We do not believe leaders understood the gravity of the threat.” The terrorist danger from bin Laden and al-Qaeda was not a major topic for policy debate among the public, the media, or in the Congress. It had barely come up during the 2000 presidential campaign.
30.1
i

While the defeat of the Taliban brought new opportunities to many Afghans, especially women who could again study in school and take jobs, it did not bring stability to the country.
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 871
No Child Left Behind
Federal legislation requiring that all students be tested and that schools show "adequate yearly progress" in the test scores of all students.
The George W. Bush Presidential Agenda
Once in office in January 2001, George W. Bush did not waste any time implementing his own agenda. While the events of the following September would make foreign policy central to that agenda, he did not come to office with such a focus. Indeed, most early initiatives focused on domestic policy. As his administration took shape, especially his choices for members of his cabinet, many wondered about his promise to be a “uniter.” He had selected a cabinet with more racial minorities and more women than any previous one, but they were a very conservative lot.
Three days after the inauguration, Bush announced that he would use the upcoming renewal of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, first passed under Lyndon Johnson in 1965 (see Chapter 22) to change the course of federal education policy. He had campaigned on a promise to address what he called the “soft bigotry of low expectations” for poor students, and he acted quickly on that promise. He called his new proposal No Child Left Behind and announced he would seek a bipartisan education reform that would be “the cornerstone of my administration.” In spite of the highly partisan split around his election, two of the most liberal Democratic members of Congress, Massachusetts senator Edward M. Kennedy and California House member George Miller played key roles in developing the act and shepherding it through Congress. The core of No Child Left Behind was a requirement that to receive federal funds states must develop clear standards, then test all students from the third to the eighth grade, and use the test results to measure whether individual schools and districts were making “adequate yearly progress” (AYP) in improving the education of all students and closing the “achievement gap.” Although many supported the legislation, its implementation quickly generated criticism of the amount of testing involved, the constraints imposed by the regulations, and the lack of funding available for implementation.
Bush moved with equal speed on his other top priority, an across-the-board tax cut. During the campaign, he had insisted that the Clinton budget surpluses should be given directly back to taxpayers. Alan Greenspan of the Federal Reserve Board told Congress that Bush’s proposed tax cut of $1.6 trillion over 10 years would not harm the economy and might do some good. There was general consensus about some sort of cut, and Bush was able to sign a phased-in tax cut of $ 1.4 trillion on June 7, 2001, less than 5 months after the inauguration. The new law cut the highest tax rate from
American classrooms like this one were transformed by the expectations included in the No Child Left Behind legislation. In this 2003 photo, Ron Paige, secretary of the Department of Education under George W. Bush, answers questions from students during a visit to the Skinner Magnet Center in Omaha, Nebraska.
872 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
30.1
39.6 percent to 35 percent a significant cut, though still above the Reagan rates. It also created a new lower tax bracket of only 10 percent for the working poor, exempted many people from any federal tax, and phased out inheritance taxes. Almost immediately, many tax payers received rebate checks. Cutting taxes was a very popular policy.
The tax cut legislation, however, posed two serious problems. The first was that most of the major cuts were to be phased in, and people were impatient. Pressure mounted to speed up the implementation of the tax cuts, and in less than 2 years, Bush proposed and Congress passed the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003, which speeded tax reductions significantly. The second problem was that, with reduced taxes, the U.S. Treasury took in a lot less money. While some, especially within the administration, argued that the tax cuts were stimulating the economy and creating jobs, most economists outside of government saw little evidence for the claim. Both sides had to acknowledge that the tax cuts—along with significantly increased spending by the administration, especially after 9/11—were creating a growing federal deficit. The surpluses of the late Clinton years disappeared. For the rest of the Bush term, the federal deficit grew significantly. Some, like Vice President Dick Cheney, said Deficits don t matter.” Economists and many leaders of both parties were less sure.
Education reform and tax cuts were the most significant domestic policy agendas of George W. Bush’s 8 years in office, and both were enacted during his first year. A number of other policy initiatives, however, were also important to the president. Bush came to office committed to what he called “faith-based initiatives.” He believed that religious communities were often better than the federal government at delivering direct human services. Nine days after the inauguration, he proposed what he called “charitable choice” legislation that would allow religious groups to apply for federal funds as long as they were not to be used for worship or proselytizing. While legislation made it through the House, two different bills were blocked in the Senate. In frustration, Bush issued executive orders in December 2002 that prohibited federal agencies from discriminating against religious charities and established faith-based offices in several cabinet departments. For religious communities that sought federal funds, it created an especially friendly atmosphere.
Bush had also campaigned on a promise to reform Social Security, giving individuals greater choice in the investment of the funds they contributed to the Social Security system. While other priorities dominated his early years, Bush devoted a significant amount of his 2005 State of the Union speech—the first of his second term—to his proposal to allow more choice in the use of Social Security funds. By 2005, however, Bush was distracted by the war, and Democrats were far less willing to give in to the president’s initiatives. Little movement happened on allowing greater choice in Social Security, and after the 2008 financial crisis, when people realized that such choices might have been financially devastating, the idea died.
Bush had little patience with conservationists. He signed legislation allowing drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska and supported offshore oil exploration. He did not move on environmental issues or global warming. Because of his own religious convictions, he opposed stem cell research in spite of dramatic appeals from many, including Nancy Reagan. His appointments, especially to the federal courts, tended to be very conservative. While the 2000 presidential election had been fought almost exclusively over domestic issues, the events of September 11, 2001, changed everything. From then onward, foreign policy and the impact of international issues on the internal politics of the United States would be the dominant agenda of the Bush administration until his last few months in office when a new economic crisis returned attention to the domestic agenda. In the meantime, however, terrorism took center stage.
The War on Terror at Home
The Report of the 9/11 Commission made recommendations to tighten security within the United States and abroad. However, they noted, “Many of our recommendations call for the government to increase its presence in our lives....Therefore, while
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 873
				30.1
II	1	R	If	
m USA PATRIOT Act
j Legislation that sought to protect zzr Americans by authorizing significant new
j data gathering by the federal government.
protecting our homeland, Americans should be mindful of threats to vital personal and civil liberties.” Whether the Bush administration, or the Obama administration that followed, kept the right balance has been a subject of continuing debate.
Even before the Commission finished its work, Congress, at Bush s request, passed the USA PATRIOT Act, which the president signed on October 26, 2001, only weeks after the attack. The act expanded not only the authority of the Department of Justice to search telephone, e-mail, medical, financial, and library records without a court order but also the authority to increase monitoring of the U.S. borders and of noncitizens within the country. It also gave the Treasury the right to monitor financial records and bank transactions. In the midst of the fears generated by 9/11, the Patriot Act passed by large majorities in both houses of Congress. Most defended the law’s provisions as necessary at a time of national emergency. Nevertheless, some were deeply troubled by the bill. Richard Armey, a conservative Republican member of the House, insisted that the act have a sunset provision and expire in 5 years. Wisconsin liberal Democratic senator Russell Feingold, the only member of the Senate to vote against the law, said, “Some have said rather cavalierly that in these difficult times, we must accept some reduction in our civil liberties in order to be secure. Of course, there is no doubt that if we lived in a police state, it would be easier to catch terrorists... .But that probably would not be a country in which we would want to live.”
The debate about the Patriot Act continued long after it passed. In January 2003, the American Library Association, worried about increasing searches of library records, condemned the Patriot Act as “a present danger to the constitutional rights and privacy rights of library users.” Others disagreed. John Yoo, who had served as one of the lead attorneys in the U.S. Department of Justice advising president Bush, and Eric Posner, a law professor, wrote a piece for the American Enterprise Institute in December 2003 in which they said, “The worst thing about the Patriot Act is its Orwellian name.... If the act marginally reduces peacetime liberties, this is a reasonable price to pay for a valuable weapon against al-Qaeda.” While the debate continued, President Bush signed a renewed version of the Patriot Act in March 2006, and President Barack Obama signed two further extensions of the law in 2010 and 2011.
The War in Afghanistan and Iraq
From the moment the first plane hit the World Trade Center, some people were convinced that Iraq’s Saddam Hussein was somehow behind it or at least allied with al-Qaeda. Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz insisted that Iraq had to be dealt with if terrorism was to be defeated. Vice President Cheney supported a U.S. attack on Iraq. Others urged caution. The CIA and others in the National Security Council initially found no “compelling case” against Iraq. Indeed, evidence showed considerable antipathy between the very religious al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden and a secular leader like Saddam Hussein in Iraq. So in the immediate aftermath of 9/11, the focus stayed on the al-Qaeda strongholds in Afghanistan (see Map 30-1). However, the issue of Iraq never went away.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair supported plans for an attack on Iraq, but Jack Straw, Blair’s foreign minister, insisted, “Saddam was not threatening his neighbors, and his WMD [Weapons of Mass Destruction] capability was less than that of Libya, North Korea, or Iran.”
As talk of a possible U.S. attack on Iraq circulated, an article appeared in the Wall Street Journal on August 15, 2002, by Brent Scowcroft, who had been the national security adviser in the administration of H.W. Bush. Scowcroft wrote, “Don’t attack Saddam.” He argued that such a war could lead to “Armageddon in the Middle East” and urged instead that the United States should “be pressing the United Nations Security Council to insist on an effective no-notice inspection regime for Iraq.” Some speculated that Scowcroft’s article was, in fact, a warning from Bush’s father—a close friend of Scowcroft—but if it was, it came too late.
874 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
30.1
MAP 30-1 Afghanistan and Iraq. After a 2001 attack on the Taliban government of Afghanistan, the United States turned its attention to Iraq, which it attacked in 2003.
In January 2002, just 4 months after the attacks in New York and Washington, DC, Bush gave his State of the Union message in which he singled out Iraq, along with Iran and North Korea, as an “axis of evil.” Bush said, “Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror....This is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world.” A conservative columnist, Charles Krauthammer, wrote, “If there was a serious internal debate within the administration over what to do about Iraq, that debate is over.”
The only remaining debate seems to have been whether the United States and Great Britain needed to seek authorization from the U.S. Congress and United Nations to attack Iraq. Although British Prime Minister Blair supported the attack on Iraq, he insisted on United Nations approval. The UN had imposed a financial and trade embargo on Iraq after it invaded Kuwait and, among other things, required it to disclose and eliminate weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and to allow UN inspections to confirm the status of any such weapons. U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell urged seeking support from Congress and the UN. Ever since the earlier 1991 U.S. war with Iraq over Kuwait, the United States had protected Kurds in northern Iraq and maintained a boycott of Iraqi oil. Now the United States was preparing to do much more.
After considerable debate, Congress voted to authorize the use of military force if diplomacy with Iraq failed. The resolution passed the Senate by a vote of 77 to
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 875
23 and the House by 296 to 133. While almost everyone supported the invasion of Afghanistan and the attack on al-Qaeda, divisions ran deep about Iraq. The two liberal Democratic senators from Massachusetts were divided. John Kerry said, I believe that a deadly arsenal of weapons of mass destruction in his [Saddam Hussein s] hands is a threat, and a grave threat.” In contrast, the senior senator from Massachusetts, Edward M. Kennedy, voted no, as did the most senior member of the Senate, West Virginia Senator Robert Byrd. A young Barack Obama had not yet been elected to the Senate but he told a rally, “This is a dumb war.”
After the congressional vote, Colin Powell took the arguments to the United Nations Security Council. Powell put his personal prestige on the line to convince the Security Council of the need to topple Saddam Hussein’s government. The vote was 15 to zero in favor. France, Russia, and China, all of which had grave reservations about a war in Iraq, hoped that the authorization would force Iraq to agree to tougher inspections to avoid an invasion. With authorization from Congress and the UN, the United States, Great Britain, and a coalition of other countries, most of whom sent only token forces, went to war and toppled Saddam Hussein with lightning speed.
On March 19, 2003, U.S. forces began the war with a huge attack using bombers— over 1,500 flights a day—plus launching Navy cruise missiles. The U.S. military called it “shock and awe.” After the air attack, ground forces moved across the country. By the first week in April, the airport at Baghdad fell to U.S.-led troops and U.S. tanks roared into the capital city. The Iraqi Minister of Information was captured, most of the rest of the leadership fled, and Saddam Hussein was a fugitive in the country he had long dominated. U.S. and British casualties were very low. The war, it seemed, had been won skillfully. On May 1, President Bush announced, “Major combat operations in Iraq have ended. In the battle of Iraq, the United States and our allies have prevailed.” The next steps would not be so easy, however.
Securing a country as large and as tightly regulated as Iraq was no easy task. Many Iraqis who were delighted to see Hussein gone were uneasy about the role of foreign troops in their country. An Iraqi professor told American reporter Anne Garrels, “You understand, you will now have to be in complete control, and we will resent you
Under a sign proclaiming "Mission Accomplished," President Bush announced the end of combat operations in Iraq on May 1,2004.The worst of America's difficulties in Iraq, however, were just beginning.
876 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
30.1
every step of the way. In fact, the United States never sent enough forces to manage the country once the old government had been removed. Very little planning had gone into preparation for the postinvasion world of Iraq. Most officials assumed that Iraqis would quickly return to work. As Condoleezza Rice, then the national security adviser, said, The concept was that we would defeat the army, but the institutions would hold, everything from ministries to police forces.” It did not happen.
As soon as the old authority was gone, looters began to pillage government buildings. They stole computers, televisions, and metal to be sold for scrap, which they raided from places such as towers holding communication lines and metal file cabinets filled with important documents. At the Central Bank, looters drilled into the vaults and ran out with the money, much of it in U.S. dollars or euros that could not be traced. They broke into the National Museum and carried off 15,000 ancient objects of extraordinary value.
Defense Secretary Rumsfeld responded, “Stuff happens.” Most Iraqis and people around the world were less understanding. One military advisor said, “We’re incompetent as far as they re concerned.” In August 2003, Thomas Friedman wrote in the New York Times, It would be a tragic irony if the greatest technological power in the history of the world came to the cradle of civilization with its revolutionary ideas and found itself defeated because it couldn’t keep the electricity on.”
In May 2003, Secretary Rumsfeld appointed a U.S. diplomat, L. Paul “Jerry” Bremer, as head of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) to bring order to Iraq. Bremer was an experienced diplomat, but he was not familiar with the Middle East. He set up his headquarters in the fortified “Green Zone,” a former Hussein palace and issued two orders that in retrospect seemed a serious mistake. Modeling the first order on the de-Nazification of Germany after World War II, Bremer ordered the de-Baathification of Iraq. The Baath Party had been Hussein’s political party, the only one allowed in the country. Government officials—senior officials, police officers, and teachers—were required to be members. The order that no member of the Baath Party could work in the new administration immediately threw some 30,000 to 50,000 out of work. The idea that ministries or the police could quickly be up and running was gone.
A week later, Bremer dissolved the Iraqi army. The initial U.S. plans for a postwar government had focused on removing a few generals and then reestablishing the army since it was solid and had discipline as well as credibility inside Iraq. With his order, Bremer dissolved this source of structure and order. He also infuriated some 400,000 Iraqi soldiers who thought they had been promised that, if they would not resist the Americans, they could keep their jobs after the war. Now they were out of their jobs and had lost their pensions, but still had access to arms.
As it became clear that the United States did not have enough troops in Iraq to maintain order, Iraqis not only became angry at the Americans but also became angry at one another. Hussein’s dictatorship had maintained tight control over a country whose people were deeply divided. Within weeks, members of the Sunni Muslim minority, of which Hussein was a part and which had been the nation s elite, were attacked by members of the Shiite Muslim majority. The Sunnis fought back. On August 29, two car bombs killed moderate Shiite leader Ayatollah Mohammad Baqir al-Hakim and 124 of his followers and destroyed the Mosque where they were worshipping. While Sunnis and Shiites fought in the center and south of the country, Iraqi Kurds in the north, who had been protected for 12 years by the “no fly zone” now fought to maintain their autonomy. Reprisal followed reprisal. Within months of the victory, Iraq was close to a civil war, and the Americans were caught in the middle of it. More American soldiers were killed between May and October of 2003 in “postwar fighting than from March to May of that year in the actual invasion.
Between 2003 and 2004, U.S. forces searched the country, trying to find weapons of mass destruction and the escaped dictator Saddam Hussein. In spite of the fact that those weapons had been one of the prime reasons for going to war, none were ever found. Hussein apparently had wanted to keep up the pretense that they existed to frighten the
Ml
Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA)
The temporary governing authority for Iraq set up after the U.S. invasion in March and April of 2003.
30 Entering a New Time 877
United States and his old enemies like Iran. In fact, the weapons were not there. Bush wrote in his Memoirs, “In retrospect, of course, we all should have pushed harder on the intelligence and revisited our assumptions.” However, Hussein himself was found not far from his hometown of Tikrit in December 2003. After an extended trial, Hussein was executed by the U.S.-backed provisional government of Iraq in December 2006.
As Iraq spiraled into civil war, U.S. soldiers complained that they had no training for serving as an occupying force. In the city of Fallujah, some 2,500 marines battled
Abu Ghraib Prison
An Iraqi prison taken over by U.S. forces after the invasion.
Iraqi detainees wait to be released at Abu Ghraib prison, west of Baghdad in Iraq, June 2006. Pictures taken in Abu Ghraib prison of tortured prisoners circulated around the world, including i the Muslim Middle East.
with 1,200 dissidents in street-to-street, sometimes room-to-room fighting. In the end, the U.S. forces won but then withdrew from the city, and the dissidents regrouped. Similar battles took place elsewhere. Iraqi Sunnis made an alliance with al-Qaeda. The home-grown version of al-Qaeda in Iraq, known as al-Qaeda in Mesopotamia, grew stronger as much of the country experienced anarchy. Electricity worked in Baghdad for perhaps 8 hours a day, even in the summer when air conditioning was desperately needed. Oil was being pumped only at very low levels.
Another disaster took place at a prison in Bagdad. Hussein had built Abu Ghraib Prison as a fortress prison for dissidents. By late summer 2003, Hussein’s prisoners had been freed and the U.S. military was using the prison to hold some 4,000 prisoners of their own. They had orders from the Pentagon to “get information” from the new prisoners at Abu Ghraib. In the search for information, they humiliated prisoners by keeping some naked in front of female guards, by piling them on top of each other, and by making them crawl and bark U.S. troops took pictures of what they were doing. In April 2004, the whole sordid mess at Abu Ghraib came to light. CBS News, the New Yorker magazine, and news organizations around the world, including Arab news sources like al Jazeera, showed the pictures and reported what was happening at Abu Ghraib. Hearing the reports, U.S. General James Mattis responded, “When you lose the moral high ground, you lose it all.”
A year after the invasion, the U.S. commanding officer General Ricardo Sanchez described the situation as a “civil war” and added, “what’s more, we had created these conditions ourselves.” Paul Bremer said, “We’ve become the worst of all things—an ineffective occupier.”
At home in the United States, opposition to the war and the occupation was growing. There were no weapons of mass destruction. There was no order in Iraq. There was no end in sight.
The war in Iraq dominated U.S. elections. In the 2004 presidential contest, the Democrats nominated a Vietnam-era war hero, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts after a spirited contest in which Howard Dean, the governor of Vermont and a virtual unknown on the national stage, was the first candidate to make the Internet the core of his campaign. Although the Dean campaign’s success at raising funds and recruiting volunteers did not lead to his nomination, it transformed future political campaigns. Once Kerry secured the Democratic nomination, the party united behind him and focused not only on the war in Iraq but also on Bush’s handling of the economy. Kerry had voted for the war, but he had become a major critic. He called the war and the subsequent U.S. occupation of Iraq a “colossal blunder,” and said that the president was “deliberately misleading the American people” about the war. Bush responded that the “world is better off without Saddam Hussein.” Outside political groups supporting Bush sought to tarnish Kerry’s military record. Kerry struck a chord with his criticism, but he was not a strong campaigner; indeed, one critic called him “a genius at
878
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
self-destruction. In the end, the president won by a very small margin of 62 million to 59 million or 50.7 percent of the popular vote to Kerry’s 48.3 percent. The electoral vote was also close: 286 to 251. Nonetheless, Bush had won a second term. In addition, Republicans also maintained control of Congress.
Two years later, protests against the war had grown much stronger as it continued into its fourth year. Although the president was not on the ballot, his policies were, and Democrats won a majority in both houses of Congress in the 2006 midterm elections. By 2006, the war s cost in lives and dollars was a top issue in the election. Democrat Nancy Pelosi replaced Republican Dennis Hastert as Speaker of the House of Representatives, the first woman in history to serve as speaker, and Democrat Harry Reid replaced Republican Mitch McConnell as majority leader in the Senate. Two new women were added to the Senate, bringing the total of women to 16—a then all-time high. Many thought the Republicans were going to be in trouble in the 2008 presidential election. In the meantime, President Bush knew he would face an unfriendly Congress during his last 2 years in office.
Looking at the situation in Iraq in 2006, one American official said, “We’ve taken Samarra four times, and we’ve lost it four times....We need a new strategy.” In November 2006, after the midterm elections, President Bush fired Defense Secretary Rumsfeld and replaced him with Robert Gates, a less ideological administrator. A new U.S. ambassador to Iraq, Ryan Crocker, who spoke Arabic and who knew the Middle East well, was appointed. General David Petraeus was made the overall commander of military forces in the region. He developed a very different strategy in Iraq. First there was “the surge,” an infusion of an additional 30,000 U.S. troops to provide strength in numbers. But instead of staying in fortified enclaves, Petraeus placed units in population centers. Their mission was to get to know and protect the Iraqi people to find out what their complaints were and try to respond. If troops took control of an area, they stayed and tried to build a new infrastructure. Troops felt vulnerable, and losses were high. Slowly, however, the troops and the Iraqi government began to take control of the country. By fall, one journalist reported from Baghdad, “Some shops stay open until late in the evening. Children play in parks, young women stay out after dark, restaurants are filled with families, and old men sit at sidewalk cafes playing backgammon and smoking shisha pipes.” It was a peace of sorts.
30.2
Quick Review Did the War on Terror dominate George W. Bush's presidency at home and abroad?
HURRICANE KATRINA AND ITS AFTERMATH
30.2
Explain the impact of Hurricane Katrina on the Gulf Coast.
Early Monday morning August 29,2005, Hurricane Katrina, one of the most powerful and deadly hurricanes in American history, hit New Orleans and the Gulf Coast of Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama. Hurricanes have naturally pounded Florida and the Gulf Coast since long before the first Europeans or Africans arrived, but Katrina was a natural disaster compounded by human failure. The result was hours and days of anguish for many, over 1,800 deaths, and more than $75 billion in damage.
the surge
A plan for the handover of authority to a new government for Iraq and an eventual orderly withdrawal of all U.S. forces.
Hurricane Katrina
A massive storm that hit New Orleans and the Gulf Coast in August 2005, leading to widespread death and destruction.
The Failure to Prepare
Only 4 years after it was founded, New Orleans was swept away by a hurricane in September 1722. In 1849, the levees protecting New Orleans failed, flooding more than 200 city blocks. Hurricanes in 1893 and 1919 flooded the city and killed many The great Mississippi River flood of 1927 devastated the city. After the 1927 floods, the Army Corps dredged the lower Mississippi River, which made for easier transport,
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 879
but changed the river’s course. Development and the pumping of oil and gas from underground further degraded the Mississippi Delta, and hundreds of square miles of swampland simply disappeared under water, leaving New Orleans much more vulnerable to storms coming from the Gulf of Mexico. In 2005, a giant storm arrived.
As Hurricane Katrina began to strengthen in late August 2005, more immediate failures added dangerously to the already vulnerable area. Weather forecasters began to realize that Hurricane Katrina might be the big one, the hurricane that people feared. Nevertheless, New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin, Louisiana governor Kathleen Blanco, and Mississippi governor Haley Barbour all refused to issue mandatory evacuation orders. An offer by Amtrak to take people by train was ignored, and the last trains left the city with empty passenger cars. At least a quarter of New Orleans population did not own cars, and the school buses that could have been used to evacuate people sat idle and eventually flooded.
As the storm grew stronger on Sunday morning August 28, Mayor Nagin opened the Superdome, the city’s massive sports complex, as a shelter of last resort. Some 8,000 or 9,000 people moved in before the storm hit. However, most of the poorest people in New Orleans lived too far from the Superdome to get there, and no transportation was offered. Then Katrina hit.
The Storm
It started raining in Biloxi, Mississippi, around 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, August 28. By 9:00 p.m., it was raining in New Orleans and the wind was starting to pick up. By midnight, the storm surge hit Mississippi. Between 2:00 and 6:00 a.m., the wind, rain, and storm surge was pounding the Gulf Coast and New Orleans. Winds were blowing steadily at 150 miles per hour. Sometime between 3:00 and 5:00 a.m., the levees on the 17th Street Canal gave way. New Orleans lost electric power at 5:15 a.m. and telephone service at 7:11 a.m.
Ihe hurricane’s winds splintered buildings, toppled power lines, collapsed highway bridges, tore off part of the roof of the New Orleans Superdome, and stirred up waves on Lake Pontchartrain that weakened the levees. The wind also drove a huge surge of water onto the shore and up the Mississippi River. Finally, in New Orleans, the weakened levees failed and a wall of water poured into neighborhoods where it rose rapidly, destroyed buildings, and trapped people in upper floors and attics.
Examples of the power of the storm were everywhere. In St. Bernard Parish, just across the Mississippi River from New Orleans, the rising water filled St. Rita’s Nursing Facility and 35 bedridden patients were drowned. In Waveland, Mississippi, where police were riding out the storm in the brick police headquarters, water filled the building and then the storm toppled it. Twenty-seven officers ended up swimming to safety, some clinging to a nearby tree for 3 hours before they were rescued. The worst destruction came in New Orleans itself, however, especially in its poorer neighborhoods. By the time Katrina hit New Orleans, almost 80 percent of its 485,000 people had evacuated. The 100,000 or so who were left were those too stubborn or too poor to go anywhere. The Lower Ninth Ward had been a working class African-American community for generations. It had strong community institutions from churches to the neighborhood bars where jazz, blues, and iconic New Orleans-style music thrived. The area was 7 feet below sea level, but the levees were designed to keep the water out. People in the Lower Ninth Ward had no transport to the Superdome, no transport out of town, and few options rather than trying to ride out the storm.
At 8.14 a.m., the Industrial Canal that brought cargo ships in but also channeled water away from the lower areas filled from the storm surge. Pumps failed, and the walls were breached. Within an hour, much of the Ninth Ward was filled with 6-8 feet of water, and the water kept rising. In a very short time, the Lower Ninth Ward was devastated.
The most famous resident of the Lower Ninth Ward was the 77-year-old Fats Domino, the famous rock n roll musician. Domino, his wife, and their five children
880 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
V
Ninth ward residents stranded on the roof of their homes await rescue. The death and destruction that came with Hurricane Katrina was unimaginable to most Americans.
j 30 J
and their families were riding out the storm at their house on Marais Street. Then the
water from the breech started pouring in and quickly rose to the top of first floor. Ihe
water was full of mud, sewage, oil, and stank of death. Workers would later call it a
toxic stew. With 8 feet of mud-filled water destroying everything in the house and
reaching the ceiling, the family ran to the attic. Some neighbors thought they had all
drowned, but the water in the Domino house did not rise higher. By afternoon, a New
Orleans Harbor Police rescued the family. Fats Domino, his wife, and his children
joined what was by then 20,000 survivors in the Superdome. The mementos of a life-
time were gone.
The Cleanup
Few failed to notice that the worse scenes of suffering and death were in African-
American communities. The New Orleans Police Department was part of the problem.
Many of the officers simply deserted their posts, leaving New Orleans to its own
devices. Some of those who remained offered heroic help, but others were eventu-
ally convicted of criminal activity. In addition, the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) failed to live up to its responsibilities. FEMA had been created during
the Carter administration to coordinate the diverse federal agencies that might be
needed in the case of a natural disaster. However, for too long during Katrina and its
aftermath, FEMA did nothing. FEMA staff were asking, “Why aren’t we getting the
orders? Why isn’t this being treated like a real emergency?” FEMA’s director in 2005,
Michael Brown, was a political appointee with no experience in managing any disas-
ters. When Brown assured Mississippi Governor Haley Barbour that FEMA had
lots of hurricane practice in Florida,” Barbour responded, I dont think you ve seen
anything like this.” It was one of the kinder statements Brown heard that week as peo-
ple waited for federal help that did not come.
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 881

American Voices
Surviving Hurricane Katrina, Mary Gehman, 2005
veryone who lived through Hurricane Katrina has their own memories. Mary Gehman shares this one.
All through the night gusts of incredibly heavy wind battered the house from the east side. It started out mild but eventually I was awakened by the noise, snug on my living room couch.
I could only hope the upstairs rooms were going to hold tight.... Finally, about noon on Monday, the winds started to diminish. There were another few hours of rain and some gusts but the storm's fury had been spent....For about an hour or two late that afternoon, after the storm had quieted and the rain stopped, I enjoyed a sense of relief and self-righteous victory. I had been right to follow my gut feeling about being able to weather the hurricane. The water outside in the street had risen higher than I had ever seen it before in my 27 years living in the alley. It flowed fast, like a roiling creek, lapping the second step of my porch.
By 5:00 p.m. that evening the creek outside my front steps had turned from a greenish grey to black, and the water was imperceptibly inching up. The flow had slowed somewhat, but there was no sign of it stopping or receding. With a sickening feeling, I watched as it came up to the threshold and began to ooze in under the front door. A few minutes later water pressed in through the baseboards: I knew we were in for a fight. The radio reported there had been a massive break in the 17th Street Canal levee and the water would rise farther before it stopped.... Hopefully, the water would stop in an hour or two.
By Tuesday 3 a.m. the water had risen to cover the second step... as I eased into it from the slick hardwood stairs, it came up above my knees to mid-thigh, well over two feet deep... .The floor boards were slippery, coated I assumed by a film of oil and filth....
By about 3:00 that afternoon, I had pretty much made up my mind to get out. What to do about the dogs was the one remaining block. I knew the boats and helicopters that were picking people up were not taking large dogs ...I glanced at the photos of my sons, their wives and my grandchildren on my night stand
and thought how useless I'd be to them were I to be found dead, my two old dogs keeping guard over me. No, I had to prioritize things in a rational manner....
Out on the balcony I could not look at the dogs, not even as I set out a bucket of water and a dish of food for each....It was dusk by the time a flat-bottomed boat manned by Bossier City, Louisiana, firefighters finally pulled up in the alley by the house where I was sitting on the roof peak. I scrambled down, grabbed the school bag and my purse, pulled the tall window shut behind me and handed my things down to a man in the boat. The Red Cross would be providing food and water, so no need to take more than the absolute minimum, the man in the boat assured me.The dogs pressed against me, and I petted them for the last time, my eyes welling over with tears....All I know is that on my return to the house five weeks later, there was no trace of the dogs....
I don't regret that I stayed through the storm—I was able to salvage a lot of important papers and items that are now of great comfort to me. The overpass will never feel the same to me as I pass over it nearly every day. My lovely dogs still haunt me. Their questioning faces swim up to the surface of my consciousness now and then—I tell them I left them for their own good. They seem to understand. They have no choice. None of us does.
Source: http://hurricanearchive.org/content/vault/survivingkatrina_2f9d906b46.pdf, downloaded August 14,2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
What does Gehman's description of the crisis tell you about her response to it?
2.	Contextualization
How does Gehman's descriptions of her actions fit with the actions that government leaders did or did not take regarding the storm?
By Wednesday, August 31,2 days after the storm, two hospitals in New Orleans, Charity and University, lost their generators. It was over 100 degrees in the hospitals. With no electricity, staff and volunteers used hand pumps to keep oxygen flowing to desperately ill people. With virtually no water or supplies, only the most rudimentary medical aid was possible. Those in the Superdome were trying to survive in horrifying, primitive conditions with no sanitation and dead bodies laying exposed in hallways. Not until Thursday were thousands of people finally evacuated to Houston, Texas, where shelter was offered. New Orleans never returned to its pre-Katrina population, and a year after the storm, whole neighborhoods were virtually abandoned even as others, like the Ninth Ward, slowly rebuilt and came back to life.
3© 2 Quick Review Based on this information, why do you think people from all over the country volunteered to help the city and people of New Orleans?
882 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF
2008 30.3
Explain the costs and consequences of the 2008 financial
crisis.
30,1
Ihe headline on the Wall Street Journal for Monday, September 15, 2008, was double the normal size and ran across all six columns of the paper. It said:
CRISIS ON WALL STREET AS LEHMAN TOTTERS, MERRILL IS SOLD AND AIG SEEKS TO RAISE CASH
By the time most people read the paper, Lehman was no longer tottering; the storied bank had declared bankruptcy. Bank of America bought Merrill Lynch, and bankers and federal authorities were trying to save the American International Group (AIG). Before the day was over, the stock market fell by 504.48 points. It would fall much further. The financial exuberance of the last 2 decades had come to a sudden end.
In one extraordinary weekend, Saturday and Sunday September 13 and 14, most of the nation’s leading bankers and senior government officials led by the Secretary of the Treasury Henry Hank Paulson tried to salvage the American economy. Although the government and the bankers failed to save Lehman Brothers, they avoided a far worse fate of massive bankruptcies and the coming of a second Great Depression. Nevertheless, they did not succeed in saving the thriving economy of the last 2 decades.
The extent of the financial crisis of 2008 came as a surprise, even to Treasury Secretary Paulson, who had warned that a crisis was coming since becoming the top federal financial official in July 2006 and to Timothy Geithner, then the head of the New York Federal Reserve Bank. The size and complexity of the crisis that hit the country in 2008 was much more severe than they would have predicted.
Ihe economy had been growing rapidly since the early 1990s. Interest rates had remained low in part because of policies at the Federal Reserve Bank; in part because of the Clinton-era efforts to cut the size of the federal deficit; and in part because bankers and governments in Asia, especially China, were willing to make low-interest loans to Americans and European borrowers, particularly to finance their purchases of Asian goods.
During the 1990s and later, because of policies fostered by the Clinton and Bush administrations, bankers got much more freedom from federal regulations than had been the case in any period since the Depression. In 1999, with bipartisan support, Congress passed the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act that repealed a section of the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act. Glass-Steagall, which was passed at the height of the Great Depression, created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to provide federal insurance for bank accounts but also required that insured banks not use their money to speculate, that is, to make risky investments. For decades, insured banks provided mortgages to families that wanted to buy a home, usually up to 80 percent of the price of a house, so people could pay off their homes over a 20- to 30-year time span. Banks were cautious in making loans, insisting on detailed documentation of a family’s ability to pay back the loan. Most of the time, a bank that issued a mortgage continued to hold it until the loan was paid off.
Investment banks, like Lehman Brothers and Goldman Sachs, were free to speculate on the stock market or in other investments, but they were not federally insured; they were risking their own money, not that of the taxpayers. What had been a hard and fast divide between investment and commercial banks in 1933 had been slowly eroding and, after 1999, had became a very porous wall.
Two further developments changed the way banks operated and mortgages were issued in the United States. President George W. Bush talked of an “ownership society” in which Americans would be invested in their communities because they owned their own homes. Liberal Democrats like Massachusetts representative Barney Frank insisted that mortgages be available to allow poorer people to own their own homes.
30.2
30.3
30,4
financial crisis of 2008
A significant economic downturn that began with the housing mortgage market and ultimately led to high unemployment.
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 883
Inflated housing prices and problems with home mortgages helped cause the financial crisis of 2008. As a result, many people were evicted or forced to sell homes they could no longer afford, which produced a glut on the housing market and a significant drop in home prices and values.
At the same time, banks found new ways to handle—and profit from—home mortgages. Rather than issue a mortgage and then hold it, banks divided mortgages into small shares—“sliced and diced” them, as some said—and then sold the mortgage shares, at a profit, to many different banks and investors. As a result, banks could invest in pieces of many different mortgages in ways that seemed to lower the risk of individual mortgage defaulting since investors held portions of many mortgages rather than the whole amount of a few. With interest rates low and mortgages easier than ever to sell to other banks, mortgage lenders also began issuing mortgages to people who never before would have been eligible. They issued mortgages with no down payment and no required documentation of income or ability to pay in what became known as the “subprime mortgage market” and then sold these mortgages at a profit. The institution that had issued the mortgage was not at risk if the person who took out the mortgage later defaulted because that institution had long since sold the mortgage, probably in pieces, to several different investors. With such easy funding available, sellers found they could ask higher prices for homes, and housing prices climbed at an extraordinary rate.
Between 2001 and 2006, housing prices kept rising, interest rates stayed low, and bankers made a lot of money. The investment bank Goldman Sachs generated an average income of $661,000 per employee in 2007. Goldman’s chief, Lloyd Blankfein, earned $54 million that year. Mortgages were no longer merely for primary residences but for investment. People bought houses as investments and then sold them for higher amounts, known as “flipping,” which enabled them to buy more expensive houses with the profits or simply pocket the money. Everyone seemed to be making money, and many argued that only fools were left out of the process. The situation was a classic bubble very much like every other bubble from the tulip bubble of the 1600s in Holland to the stock market bubble of 1929 to the dot.com bubble of the 1990s.
In 2006, the housing bubble reached its peak. Housing prices stopped rising. People who had bought houses they could not afford and had planned to “flip” them, could not sell them. People who had bought homes with flexible interest rates, thinking that they would refinance for a lower rate later, could not find a new mortgage. More people started defaulting on loans. As defaults grew, banks who held the mortgages started to get into trouble. Even if mortgages had been “sliced and diced,” banks that owned slices of mortgages that were in default were now, themselves, in trouble. Initially, most people thought the crisis would be limited to a few mortgage lenders who had taken too many risks. They were wrong.
Before long, it became clear that large and supposedly stable investment banks like Lehman and Goldman Sachs, which held portions of many sliced loans, were in a lot of trouble. Bankers who had taken risks throughout their careers, confident that there was always a way out, could not find a way out of the crisis. Over the weekend of September 13-14, 2008, while Treasury Secretary Paulson was trying to maintain confidence, he privately called his wife to share his worries. “What if the system collapses?” he asked.
In the end, the nation’s financial system did not collapse. But it did not resume the financial health that had characterized most of the 1990s and early 2000s. At the end of September, Secretary Paulson and congressional leaders put together Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) legislation that would stop the continuing financial collapse. When TARP was put to a vote in the House of Representatives, in spite of the support of leaders of both parties, the bailout was rejected by a 228 to 205 vote by members of both parties who did not think it was the government’s business to use taxpayer money to bail out investors who had taken too many risks with their own funds. Immediately after the vote, the Dow Jones Industrial Average lost another 777 points, the biggest 1-day drop ever. Another report
884
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
indicated that 159,000 jobs had been lost in September. The crisis was spreading far beyond the banks. As credit and confidence dried up, people saw jobs, savings, and pensions disappear. The American economy seemed to be teetering badly. Finally on Friday October 3, under pressure from President Bush and from both major presidential candidates, Congress passed the TARP legislation. The law created a $700 billion fund to buy the worst of the troubled assets from the banks and stabilize the system. We have shown the world that the United States will stabilize our financial markets and maintain a leading role in the global economy,” Bush said.
In May 2009, Congress created a Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission to study the crisis. The commission held a number of hearings. At one of them, in June 2010, the financier Warren Buffett was asked who was to blame. “ [I]t’s a little bit like Cinderella at the ball, Buffett said. “People may have some feeling that at midnight it s going to turn to pumpkin and mice, but it’s so darn much fun....There’s no villain. Others thought there was some specific blame to be assigned. People blamed Lehman Brothers and other banks. They blamed the auditing companies that should have looked more closely at the account books of the banks. They blamed the repeal of Glass-Steagall. And many saw the crisis as one more in the sad long line of investment bubbles that, when they burst, hurt not only those caught up in the speculation but the economy of the whole nation and, indeed, of the world. Certainly the crisis could have been worse, and the work of the Treasury Secretary and the TARP legislation may have kept the country from another Great Depression. However, as Congressman Barney Frank said of Paulson’s efforts, “You don’t get any credit for disaster averted.”
After 2008, unemployment rates stayed stubbornly high. In 2009 and 2010, the United States had an official unemployment rate of 10 percent, and if one counted discouraged and part-time workers, it was closer to 16 percent. Those who lost their jobs were out of work for increasingly longer periods of time. High unemployment creates its own negative cycle. For the unemployed, it is devastating. When unemployed people do not buy cars, computers, and refrigerators, the whole economy slows down. As the nation entered the 2012 election cycle, economic movement was very slow.
The crisis of 2008 also brought other economic problems to light. Firms like Lehman Brothers had been painting a rosier picture of their finances than the situation warranted, and others were engaged in much more corrupt practices. Three months after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, a New York financier, Bernard Madoff, was arrested and charged with securities fraud. Madoff s Investment Securities Company was, in reality, a giant Ponzi scheme (see Chapter 21 for information on the first such scheme by Charles Ponzi). Madoff delivered grand returns on investments made with his company, but it turned out that Madoff simply used the funds that were invested with his company to pay out high returns on older funds. He did not invest, or even save them. As long as more money kept coming in, Madoff was able to keep up the illusion of amazing success, and investors were happy. When the nation s finances seized up in the fall of 2008, Madoff was not able to keep the investments coming in, and without them, the payments could not keep going out, and the whole house of cards collapsed. Madoff was sentenced to 150 years in prison; investors lost between $10 and $17 billion.
In May 2011, another highly regarded investor, Raj Rajaratnam, head of Galleon, a multibillion dollar hedge fund, or speculative investment group, was convicted of 14 counts of securities fraud for bribing corporate employees to provide information that allowed Galleon to “guess” future stock values and make a fortune. By 2011, business leaders, and especially investors, were not highly regarded by a large segment of the American public.
Business leaders were not the only ones held in low esteem, however. Government officials, both Democrats and Republicans, were distrusted. Why, people asked, did the government bailout banks and the auto industry? Why was so much taxpayer money needed to stabilize investment banks when bankers were still getting huge bonuses but unemployment stayed stubbornly high? Were the high officials in the
30.1
302
30.3
304
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 885
Treasury Department really on the side of the average American? Some wondered when the real recovery would begin. Some wondered whether the United States was at the beginning of a permanent decline while other nations, especially perhaps China, might replace it as the world’s leading financial powerhouse.
38 3 Quick Review How did policies, legislation, and events from the 1990s onward lead to the financial crisis of 2008?
NEW LIBERALS, NEW CONSERVATIVES
30.4
Analyze the most recent political developments in the United States.
Barack Obama was elected as a U.S. Senator from Illinois, just as George W. Bush won a second term in 2004. From the day he entered the Senate, Obama was better known than most newcomers. His upset win in a 7-way Illinois Democratic primary and his keynote speech calling for a new “politics of hope” at the 2004 convention that nominated John Kerry, followed by his continuing telegenic appearance, his life story, and his ability to rally people, all led many to notice him.
Nevertheless, he was a Senate freshman, and when the Majority Leader Harry Reid called him in for a meeting, Obama was surprised. As he headed toward the meeting, Obama told Robert Gibbs, his scheduler, “I wonder what we screwed up.” But Reid stunned the young senator. As Obama recounted the meeting to Gibbs, he said, “Harry wants me to run for president... .He really wants me to run for president.”
Reid had certainly noticed Obama’s discomfort with the Senate’s slow pace, but more important, he had noticed the way Obama could connect with voters. Reid also had another reason to look carefully at Obama. The obvious front-runner for the Democratic nomination was Hillary Clinton: first lady from 1993 to 2001 and, since 2001, the U.S. Senator from New York. In the Senate, Clinton had established a solid track record. Reid liked her. Obama liked her. But a lot of Americans did not like her. Since her days as first lady and leader of President Bill Clinton’s health care task force, Hillary Clinton had been a lightning rod for opposition to expanded government policies and, for some, for opposition to the role of women in politics. A lot of voters hated her. Like many Democrats, including Reid, she had voted to authorize the War in Iraq, and by 2006, it was becoming clear that, with the war going badly, such a vote was a terrible burden among liberal Democrats. Finally, for Reid and many of the Democratic Party’s senior leaders, the worst nightmare was the nomination of Hilary Clinton followed by some new revelation about her husband’s behavior like the Monica Lewinsky scandal that would end up bringing another Republican to the White House. They were desperate for another candidate, and in Obama they thought they had found one. The Unprecedented Election of 2008
In modern American politics, being anointed by the party’s leaders is a far cry from being nominated. Running for high office required Obama and the other candidates to slog through months of primary elections, including the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary in January, until the midsummer nominating convention. All along the way, voters are more than happy to overrule the party elite.
Obama needed to decide whether he was going to run for president or not. David Plouffe, one of Obama’s inner circle of campaign leaders, warned him that he could stay in the Senate and enjoy weekends and vacations with his family or he could run for president, have every aspect of his life pried into, travel constantly, and “lead a lonely, miserable life. There was no middle ground. Obama needed time to talk it over with his wife Michelle. In the end, they were both in. Most people still considered it a long shot, but slowly, the long shot turned into reality.
886 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
In one of the first steps toward seeking the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination, then Senator Obama visited Netscape founder Marc Andreessen (see Chapter 29) and told him that he wanted to run the most sophisticated digital campaign on record. Andreessen was impressed that “the Senator was personally interested in the rise of social networking, Facebook, YouTube, and user-generated content.” Several veterans of the Dean campaign also signed on to help the new campaign, and with the help of the Internet, Obama was able to raise twice the funds of his main rival, Hillary Clinton, and go on to win the nomination in spite of a long and bruising race between Obama and Clinton that remained close through the end of the primary season. Only in June was it clear that Obama had won the nomination.
It had been a historic contest. Hillary Clinton was the first woman to come so close to the presidential nomination, and Barack Obama was the first African-American to win. Perhaps, some thought, the nation was past the point where either gender or race mattered as they had in the past. Others insisted that gender and race were still very powerful forces, but in Clinton and Obama, the country had two extraordinary candidates who transcended the odds to accomplish what they did.
The battle for the Republican nomination was almost as hard fought in 2008. President Bush could not run for a third term, and his popularity had sunk as a result of the war and financial crisis. Arizona senator John McCain was the front-runner throughout the campaign. Although he had almost defeated Bush for the nomination in 2000 and was a war hero—having been a prisoner of war in Vietnam—McCain also had a hair-trigger temper and had divorced after having an affair and then remarried. The 2006 midterm Republican losses probably strengthened McCain’s chances. McCain’s reputation as a moderate and an independent meant that he would not be tarred with all of Bush’s troubles. In spite of several primary challengers, McCain won key Republican primaries, and by March, it was clear he would be the Republican nominee for president. The only remaining question was who he would select to be his running mate.
John McCain knew that his selection of a vice presidential candidate was especially important. Obama led in fund-raising and public opinion polls. McCain needed a game-changing move. McCain wanted Connecticut’s Democratic senator Joe Lieberman. Lieberman was a staunch Democrat and had served as Al Gore’s running mate in 2000, but he had broken with the majority of his own party on the war in Iraq, which he supported, and he was already campaigning for McCain. His selection would reinforce McCain’s credentials as an independent. But in the end, other Republicans convinced McCain that proposing a Democrat who, more important, was prochoice on the issue of abortion, would split the party. McCain rejected his friend Lieberman and selected the 44-year-old governor of Alaska, Sarah Palin. She was popular in Alaska and had all the credentials needed as a conservative Republican. Palin became a campaign sensation but her lack of familiarity with national politics, and her feuding with the McCain campaign staff probably hurt as much as it helped. When Obama asked Delaware senator Joseph Biden to be his running mate, the contrast between someone with decades of national experience and Alaska s 20-month governor could not have been greater, even if Obama also had only served in the Senate for that amount of time.
Ihe September financial crisis played to Obama’s strengths. McCain always said that economic issues were not his strong point, and when, after the Lehman bankruptcy he said, “The fundamentals of our economy are strong”—the same words Herbert Hoover had used at the height of the Great Depression-his advisors started to panic. In contrast, Obama had a comprehensive economic plan, and in the days after Lehman’s collapse, he spent his time learning from people like Bush’s Treasury Secretary Paulson and Federal Reserve chair Ben Bernanke, both of whom came to respect him. At the same time, the economy and the war in Iraq continued to hamper the Republicans. On Election Day, Obama defeated McCain by 53 percent to 46 percent of the vote, carrying 365 electoral votes to McCain’s 173 votes. Ihe natron, winch
30.1
30.2
303
30.4
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 887
health care reform
The top priority of the Obama administration to provide universal health care for all Americans.
had fought a civil war and witnessed a long civil rights movement over issues of race had just elected its first African-American president. It was an historic moment. Now people were about to see what sort of change Barack Obama had been talking about.
In November 2008, Barack Obama was elected president of the United States—a time of celebration for many.
Obama's Agenda—Stimulus and a Health Plan
President-elect Obama asked his former opponent Hillary Clinton to serve as his secretary of state. She was reluctant to leave the independence of the Senate, but Obama pressed and Clinton took the job. Obama told Clinton, “Ihe economy is a much bigger mess” than imagined, and he needed a very strong secretary of state to run foreign policy. He knew that while the bailout of the banks had been a first step, much more needed to be done. Nevertheless, economic experts, political leaders, and average voters all disagreed sharply about what should be done.
Obama was famous for his use of a Blackberry and an iPhone during his Senate career and his presidential campaign. Bemoaning the need to give up his iPhone for security reasons once elected president, Obama continued to use a Blackberry as well as his personal Twitter account, his MacBook Pro, and an iPad2. The world of high technology arrived in the White House in January 2009.
Immediately on taking office in January 2009, Obama proposed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, and it passed within weeks. The act pumped money into the economy, providing funds for road improvements, railroads, and unemployment benefits. The Recovery and Reinvestment Act was standard economics, an effort to “prime the pump” and get the economy moving by spending funds so employment would rise, private spending would pick up, and the government could step back. Unfortunately for Obama, the emergency spending piled further debts on top of those already in place, and many began to worry about the cost.
While the administration struggled with the economy, Obama also moved quickly to implement what he hoped would be his signature initiative: health care for all Americans. From Harry Truman on, every Democratic administration sought to implement health care reform, but every effort had failed. Obama wanted to be the Democrat who accomplished what others had failed. After a long and bitter fight, he was able to sign the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act on March 23, 2010. Unlike the stimulus legislation, however, health care was a long fight, filled with compromises. It dominated the Congress that came to office with Obama. From the beginning the Republican minority was dedicated to defeating the measure. The Senate rule that a filibuster could stop all legislation unless 60 Senators voted to close debate provided effective leverage for Republicans and Democrats. The Senate included only 60 Democrats, so every one of them could demand special consideration and exemptions, and many did, before the final vote. The result was that the historic health care legislation passed only after a political process that discouraged almost everyone. The new law required every American to have health insurance; prohibited insurance companies from excluding anyone, including those with preexisting conditions; provided government subsidies for those who have trouble buying insurance; and penalized employers not offering health insurance. A number of state attorneys general challenged the legislation in court, but in the spring of 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court in a split decision upheld the law. Surprising its supporters, the law ended up being a political liability for a Democratic president and his party in the midterm elections of 2010 and the presidential election of 2012.
888 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
The Rise of the Tea Party, Occupy Wall Street, and Divided
Government
In part because of anger at the health care legislation, in part because of fears about the growing national debt, and in part because of a long-standing bias among Americans against big government, the huge plurality with which Obama came to office started to evaporate rapidly.
On January 19,2010, just a year after Obama’s inauguration, the growing voter anger became apparent to the nation, particularly after one of the icons of American liberalism, Massachusetts senator Edward M. Kennedy, died of a brain tumor in August 2009. Kennedy had served in the U.S. Senate since 1962, the fourth-longest Senate career in U.S. history. A special election was called to fill Kennedy’s unexpired term, and almost everyone assumed that whoever received the Democratic nomination would get the job. But a little known Republican state senator, Scott Brown, campaigned hard, telling people, It s not Kennedy s seat.. .it’s the people’s seat,” and promising to be the crucial 40th vote to sustain a filibuster in the Senate against the health care legislation. Brown won easily, telling his cheering supporters on election night, “What I’ve heard again and again on the campaign trail is that our political leaders have grown aloof from the people, impatient with dissent, and comfortable in the back room making deals.” Although Brown was not able to stop the passage of the health care law, his election was a sign that something was shifting in American politics. It was not the first such sign.
Only weeks after Obama’s inauguration, protests were springing up in many different places. In Seattle, a 29-year-old woman, Keli Carender, organized a small protest rally about “the spending,” whether it was Bush’s TARP or Obama’s stimulus. Carender told a small crowd that “I started thinking, what are we getting ourselves into? It didn’t make sense to me to be spending all this money when we don’t have it.” Then, a little while later, on February 19, 2009, a financial news commentator, Rick Santelli, said that Obama’s stimulus efforts were “promoting bad behavior” if they bailed out “the losers” who had taken out larger mortgages than they could afford. Santelli said, “We’re thinking of having a Chicago Tea Party in July.” And the name took hold.
In September 2010, between 70,000 and 90,000 demonstrators converged on the Mall in Washington, DC, to protest the health care legislation and government spending. Some wore tricolor hats to symbolize their link to the original Boston Tea Party. Some carried signs that said, “Thank you, Glenn Beck!” referring to the conservative television commentator who railed against the Obama administration. Some, alluding to fears that the health care legislation would limit treatments, carried signs that said, “Pull the plug on Obama, not Grandma.” The National Tea Party Coalition tried to coordinate efforts. The Republican vice presidential nominee from 2008, Sarah Palin, adopted the Tea Party Platform and spoke at its rallies. Nevertheless, the movement was distrustful of self-proclaimed leaders. Different groups in different places did as they pleased. Tea Party candidates challenged Republicans in primary elections all through 2009 and 2010 and sometimes defeated long-standing Republican moderates. In November 2010, with solid Tea Party support, Republicans took control of the House of Representatives and made gains in the Senate. But the Tea Party candidates were of a different sort than the older Republicans, not only more conservative but also far less willing to compromise.
The Tea Party was fueled by fear about the debt, uncertainty about the economy, and anger at big institutions, most of all the federal government but also corporations and universities. Many in the Tea Party argued that the federal government should do no more than what was specifically authorized in the Constitution, and almost all of its members were generally distrustful of government programs, especially those coming from the federal government and those designed to help the poor or minority groups. It quickly became clear that the Tea Party was not going away, even though its membership might be filled with internal contradictions. Tea Party members disliked government but wanted their Social Security checks to arrive on time; they hated the new health care but loved their Medicare cards. When the outgoing Congress repealed
Tea Party
A protest group whose members sometimes modeled themselves on the Tea Party of the American Revolution and objected to the rising federal debt, Obamacare, and most government regulation.
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 889
level of student debt, the lack of job opportunities, and the fact that the economy seemed stacked in favor of the rich.
the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” ban on gay and lesbian personnel serving in the military in late 2010, the Tea Party was divided about its response; neither the Tea Party nor the Republicans made it a major issue. Still, the Tea Party, with its focus on economic issues and anger at big government was a powerful group.
In the summer of 2011, the new Tea Party-fueled Republican majority in the House of Representatives brought the country to the brink of financial default as they refused until the last minute to raise the nation’s borrowing capacity. Standard & Poor’s, one of the nation’s leading auditing agencies, lowered the U.S. credit rating for the first time in history because of the government’s seeming inability to deal with the federal debt.
As if in response to the Tea Party, a new movement of students and other young people also emerged to protest conditions in the country. While the Tea Party took a conservative stance on economic issues, Occupy Wall Street was closer to the left on most issues. In September 2011, a group of young people held a rally near Wall Street in Lower Manhattan and then moved into nearby Zuccotti Park where they set up tents, a library, a communications center, and a kitchen, and planned to stay. A Canadian publication, Adbusters, had been calling for just such a move, and by late September it was a reality. The rallying cry of Occupy Wall Street was “We are the 99%” to differentiate themselves from the richest 1 percent, including the bankers who surrounded them in Lower Manhattan. Although those gathering in protest consistently refused to issue a manifesto or platform, Occupy was an angry response to the financial crisis and the growing gap between rich and poor in the country. They condemned the huge level of college debt that many young people were carrying and the difficulties for a new generation in getting jobs.
Before long, Occupy movements were springing up all around the country—Occupy Los Angeles, Occupy Oakland, Occupy Denver, Occupy Boston, and Occupy Rochester. In November, some 3 months after the encampment at Zuccotti Park began, New York police, on orders from the mayor, cleared the park. Mayors and police departments in other cities had generally acted sooner. Nevertheless, the Occupy movement was far from over. Through the winter and the following year, Occupy held rallies, meetings, and planning sessions. Neither Occupy nor the Tea Party was going to go away, and both would be forces to deal with. Governing a nation so deeply divided was going to be difficult. The terms of the 2012 election were set.
The Tea Party movement named itself after those who had dumped tea in Boston harbor in 1773 rather than pay a tax on it. Many in the modern movement shared the anti-tax, anti-government sentiments of the earlier Tea Party while some dressed the part.
890 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
■Ill
30J
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Same-Sex Marriage
302
On June 26,2013, in a 5-4 opinion in the case of United States v. Windsor, the United States Supreme Court declared a significant part of the Defense of Marriage Act unconstitutional. Writing for the majority, Justice Anthony Kennedy said:
DOMA's principal effect is to identify a subset of state-sanctioned marriages and make them unequal....By this dynamic DOMA undermines both the public and private significance of state-sanctioned same-sex marriages; for it tells those couples, and all the world, that their otherwise valid marriages are unworthy of federal recognition. This places same-sex couples in an unstable position of being in a second-tier marriage.
The decision was not without debate. Four justices opposed the majority. Writing for the minority, Justice Antonin Scalia said that the court should never have taken on the case and, further, that the decision would lead inevitably to the Supreme Court's declaring all state laws against gay marriage to be invalid.
Nevertheless, the majority opinion became the law of the land and, as a result, same-sex couples married in the 13 states, the District of Columbia, and under the five Native American tribal governments that approved same-sex marriage were provided all the benefits—including tax advantages, pension, and visitation rights—that all other married couples had. It was a major change and one that came very quickly.
When the Congress passed and President Bill Clinton signed the Defense of Marriage Act in September 1996, no state recognized same-sex marriage. Before the 1996 legislation, Congress had left decisions about what constituted a legitimate marriage to the states. But fearing the potential of same-sex marriage, the Republican Congress passed the Defense of Marriage Act and the Democratic President signed it. As a result, federal law said that no matter what a state did, in the eyes of the federal government (for federal income tax, for federal pensions, for benefits for spouses of government employees and armed forces personnel and many related matters) a state-sanctioned same-sex marriage was invalid.
Nevertheless, as some feared and others hoped, states started to act on their own. In 2003, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court declared that state laws prohibiting same-sex marriage were invalid in that state and gay and lesbian couples began getting married there. State courts in other states, including California, Connecticut, and Iowa, issued similar rulings. Then in 2009, the Vermont legislature sanctioned same-sex marriage, New York followed in 2011, and in 2012 Washington, Maine, and Maryland passed similar laws.
Activists Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin became the first same-sex couple to be married in San Francisco on February 12, 2004. In June 2013, the United States Supreme Court said that same-sex couples could not be denied federal marriage benefits.
Same-sex marriages, illegal in every part of the United States in the 1990s, were recognized in 2013 by states comprising 30 percent of the American population and by the federal government. Opinion polls indicated that the majority of the American people agreed with the new policies. It was a rapid and dramatic change in American culture.
Thinking Critically
1.	Comparison
How would you compare the political mood in the United
States when the Defense of Marriage Act was passed in 1996 and when it was declared unconstitutional in 2013?
2.	Contextualization
What other developments in American culture and political debate might help explain decisions like those of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, the Vermont legislature or in 2013 the U.S. Supreme Court? How much does context impact such decisions?
Mil
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 891
United States v. Windsor
A
June 2013 Supreme Court decision that declared Americans in same-sex marriages had the same federal rights as all other married citizens. The Election of 2012
As President Obama and the Democrats looked to the 2012 election, they did so with considerable optimism. The worst of the financial crisis was past, and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan were at least winding down. At the same time, the president and his party were aware of some significant liabilities. The economy remained far from robust, the health care law—which some called Obamacare remained unpopular, especially among people who resented all forms of government intrusion in their lives. Many of those who had voted for the first time in 2008 to support Obama were disillusioned with the slow pace of change and might well not bother to vote in 2012. It was going to be a close contest.
The battle for the Republican nomination was a long one. In the early stages, many wondered whether 2008 vice presidential nominee and Tea Party darling Sarah Palin would enter the race, but she never did. Once the contest for the Republican nomination got under way, former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, who had been a serious contender for the 2008 nomination, was always a front-runner. But many in the Republican Party thought Romney was too liberal, and a number of other candidates, including former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty, former speaker Newt Gingrich, businessman Herman Cann, and Representative Michele Bachmann, gave Romney a strong challenge. In the end, Romney won the nomination and asked Congressman Paul Ryan, who had earned his conservative credentials with a series of tax cutting proposals, to be his running mate.
In the fall election, Obama was generally considered to be the front-runner, but many thought the race was too close to call. In the first presidential debate, Obama performed poorly—seeming disinterested—and Romney surged. In the later debates, however, Obama came on strong. One of Romney’s great strengths, his years of business experience, came to hurt him as Democrats exploited the numbers of layoffs that had taken place in Romney-owned companies. Late in the campaign, a
® Polls open @ Obama leading n Romney leading ■ Polls closed ■ Obama won ■ Romney won
I I
llj I iviMr au'z i ne ciecuon or zui z.
,	,	,	_ nap captures tne extent of Obama's presidential election triumph
and underscores the realignments of Republican red states and Democratic blue states.
892 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
private conversation in which Romney had told a group of supporters that 47 percent of the electorate would never support him because they were “dependent on the government ’ angered many. On election day, Obama won by a solid 51 percent to 47 percent majority and carried 332 electoral votes to Romney’s 206 (see Map 30-2). The Congress, however, remained divided, with Democrats having a majority in the Senate and Republicans in the House.
At his second inauguration in January 2013, on what was Martin Luther King, Jr. s, birthday, President Obama laid out the themes that he said would be most important in his second term. Appealing to some important moments in American history, he said, “We, the people, declare today that the most evident of truths—that all of us are created equal—is the star that guides us still; just as it guided our forebears through Seneca Falls, and Selma, and Stonewall...” and then appealing to King’s memory he added, “Our individual freedom is inextricably bound to the freedom of every soul on Earth.”
And he continued:
It is now our generation’s task to carry on what those pioneers began. For our journey is not complete until our wives, our mothers and daughters can earn a living equal to their efforts. Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law for if we are truly created equal, then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well.
Our journey is not complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to exercise the right to vote. Our journey is not complete until we find a better way to welcome the striving, hopeful immigrants who still see America as a land of opportunity—until bright young students and engineers are enlisted in our workforce rather than expelled from our country. Our journey is not complete until all our children, from the streets of Detroit to the hills of Appalachia, to the quiet lanes of Newtown, know that they are cared for and cherished and always safe from harm.
His address was not a set of policy recommendations but, rather, a way of carving out a vision.
30,1
303
303
30.4
began his second term, the United States was more diverse than ever, with some >king optimistically toward the future and others looking nostalgically toward the past.
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 893
Former Speaker Newt Gingrich, who had contested the Republican nomination, said of Obama’s speech that he “approved of 80 percent of President Barack Obama s inaugural address”; however, “the rest,” Gingrich said, was goofy left-wingism.” Deciding where any consensus might be found would be more difficult than Gingrich’s response might imply. Soon after the inauguration, Obama said he would use executive authority to institute action on climate change and quickly issued tough new limitations on emissions. The president had promised as much in his inaugural address, which had led Gingrich to say, “The whole section about climate change is nonsense.” Ihe divides on that issue, as on so many issues that had split the Congress and the country during Obama’s first term, seem destined to continue for the foreseeable future. Many spoke of their desire for greater national unity and good will, but it remained an illusive goal.
Quick Review How have domestic issues contributed to divisions in the government and the country since 2008?
CONCLUSION
George W. Bush, in the first year of his presidency, achieved two major domestic policy goals: education reform and tax reform. But September 11, 2001, permanently shifted the focus of the Bush administration from domestic problems to international terrorism. Henceforth, the war on terror would dominate his presidency and remain a key issue for his successor in office, Barack Obama.
In the days after the September 11 attacks, it became clear that al-Qaeda and its leader, Osama bin Laden, were responsible. The Bush administration immediately developed a strategy to punish not only the direct perpetrators but also those who harbored them. When it was determined that the Taliban government of Afghanistan was protecting bin Laden and al-Qaeda, U.S. ground forces invaded the country and quickly overthrew the Taliban regime. Although the United States had forced a change in government in Afghanistan and had killed or captured many al-Qaeda operatives, both bin Laden and his chief lieutenant had escaped into Pakistan. It took another 10 years to find bin Laden, but Taliban insurgents continued to engage the U.S. military and destabilize Afghanistan and other parts of the world.
While the United States waged war in Afghanistan, the Bush administration turned its attention to Iraq. Despite the fact that neither the CIA nor the UN Nations found compelling evidence that Iraq was connected to the September 11 attacks, many in the administration favored U.S. military intervention. Ultimately, the United States and Great Britain obtained UN and congressional approval for an invasion, based on alleged Iraqi possession of weapons of mass destruction. Major combat operations in Iraq ended quickly, but the United States was ill prepared to serve as an occupying force. U.S. troops lacked clearly defined military objectives, and Iraq quickly descended into civil war. By 2004, public opinion was turning against the war. U.S. casualties were high, Iraq was in chaos, and no weapons of mass destruction had been found. Still, the U.S. mission in Iraq continued until December 2011.
894 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
From 2005 until 2008, domestic problems also plagued the Bush administration. In 2005, the federal response to Hurricane Katrina was wholly inadequate, and the U.S. economy was, in 2008, in a deep recession. The 2008 presidential election took place against this backdrop and culminated in the election of the nation’s first African-American president, Barack Obama. Obama moved quickly to address the financial crisis, but while the economy was stabilized, unemployment remained high. The Obama administrations highest priority was to get Congress to approve a federal health insurance system which was signed into law in 2010. In the midst of a very slow recovery in which ordinary Americans suffered greatly, new protests including the Tea Party and the Occupy movements emerged to express voter dissatisfaction with continual war and with the economic meltdown. By the time of the 2012 presidential election, the nation was more divided than it had been in decades. Nevertheless, many liberal Americans celebrated when Obama won a second term in November 2012 and when in June 2013 the U.S. Supreme Court declared portions of the federal Defense of Marriage Act to be unconstitutional, giving people in a same-sex marriage the same federal rights as other married people. Still, the nation entered Obamas second term deeply divided on social and economic issues, and lasting resolutions seemed hard to find.
CHAPTER E
How did the election of 2012 encompass issues that plagued the United States since 2000?
Chapter 30 Entering a New Time 895
