Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 299
113
	Significant Dates
1821	Mexico gains independence from Spain First American colony established in Texas
1829	Mexico abolishes slavery, including in Texas
1830	Revolts against Mexican authority begin in Texas
1835	Americans in Texas capture the Alamo, drive out Mexican army
1836	Narcissa and Marcus Whitman help found the first Protestant mission in Oregon Texas declares independence from Mexico Fall of the American forces in the Alamo to Mexican army Treaty of Velasco recognizes independent Republic of Texas Congress passes gag rule forbidding discussion of slavery
1837	Financial Panic of 1837
1842	Webster-Ashburton Treaty resolves U.S.-Canadian border dispute
1844	Treaty of Wang-hsia gives United States open trading rights in China
1845	The term Manifest Destiny becomes popular James K. Polk inaugurated as president U.S. annexation of Texas
1846	Beginning of U.S. War with Mexico
1848	Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ends war with Mexico Gold Rush in California
1849	Thoreau's Civil Disobedience published
1851	Herman Melville's Moby Dick published
1853	Commodore Perry enters Tokyo Harbor, begins opening Japan to United States Gadsden Purchase, last acquisition of land in continental United States
Manifest Destiny
The doctrine, first expressed in 1845, that the expansion of white Americans across the continent was inevitable and ordained by God and was a means to spread Protestant Christianity and Jacksonian Democracy to more people.
Republic of Mexico, by 1830, they too were seeking protection from the American government. In all these cases, many in the government were happy to oblige, seeing the movement of colonists as a first step in expanding the nation. Being aware of the nation’s long-term expansion, the power of the idea of Manifest Destiny, and the political and military actions that the nation’s leaders took in the name of that idea is essential to understanding how the nation expanded into the shape it has today. This chapter will explore the political, diplomatic, and military issues involved in turning the idea of Manifest Destiny into a geographic reality.
It is also important to understand how the acquisition of so much new territory in the 1830s and 1840s, as well as other developments in people’s thinking, changed the lives of those who lived in the United States. The population of the country was expanding as dramatically as its geographical borders. Migrants from around the world especially flocked to California to find their fortunes in the gold. Citizens of the Republic of Mexico suddenly found themselves living in the United States because the border had moved, as did American Indians, who rejected the claims of all nations to their lands. Other immigrants came to the already established parts of the nation. In addition, amid the many changes, slaves, supporters and opponents of slavery, and women became increasingly vocal about the issue of freedom and equality. These issues will be explored in Chapter 12. The great territorial expansion of these years and dramatic changes in the makeup and the thinking of people in the United States during the same time period transformed the country and its future.
MANIFEST DESTINY—THE IMPORTANCE OF AN IDEA
Explain what Manifest Destiny meant and how it led the United States to involvement in Texas, California, and Oregon.
11.1
The idea that the United States had a “manifest destiny” led to more than simply acquiring land, though between 1845 and 1848, the United States would almost double in size, from 1.8 million square miles to almost 3 million. Advocates of Manifest Destiny claimed that the United States—with God’s blessing—should rule the heart of North America from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific and from a still-to-be-defined border with British Canada to an even more undefined border with the Republic of Mexico. For O Sullivan and other supporters of Manifest Destiny, it was the nations appointed role to spread not only democracy—in its Jacksonian form—but also to spread Protestant Christianity in place of the Catholicism of Mexico or the native beliefs of American Indians. The same year that O’Sullivan coined the term Manifest Destiny, Illinois Representative John Wentworth told Congress that he “did not believe the God of Heaven...designed that the original States should be the only abode of liberty on earth. On the contrary, he only designed them as the great center from which civilization, religion, and liberty should radiate and radiate until the whole continent shall bask in their blessing. That belief, held by many beyond Wentworth, that the United States was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy to the planet and especially North America—was a driving force in the push for new lands in the 1840s.
Many Americans supported versions of Manifest Destiny for their own reasons. Land speculators and those promoting the extension of the nation’s railroads wanted to exploit the vast lands in the West. Farmers dreamed of starting over in rich—and cheap new lands. Workers believed that rapid national expansion would guarantee industrial profits and thus their jobs, or give them a chance to start over if necessary. Protestant leaders and missionaries saw U.S. control of the new lands as an opportunity to ensure that a Protestant United States, not a Catholic Mexico, controlled the continent. Manifest Destiny also referred to a patriotic belief that the nation had a divine mission to become a world power.
and a National Identity, 1800-1848
ifllli
At the mythical level, Manifest Destiny was seen as the spirit hovering over the westward movement of white settlers, leading them and urging them on whether they came by foot, covered wagon, or stage coach.
In contrast, many other Americans opposed the whole idea of a “manifest destiny.” Democrats tended to support expansion, but most Whigs, led by Henry Clay, had grave reservations. Clay’s goal was not necessarily a larger country but a better developed one with roads, canals, railroads, and industries knitting it together and ensuring its prosperity. Antislavery advocates opposed the acquisition of more land, especially Texas, since they were certain that new lands meant new slave states. However, some proslavery advocates, notably South Carolina Senator John C. Calhoun, wanted Texas but worried that other incorporated lands, especially California and Oregon, might become free states peopled by darker-skinned citizens, which would shift power away from the white slaveholding regions.
Some Americans also saw the violence associated with expansion as simply wrong. Many residents of the lands from Texas to California did not want to become part of the United States at all. Antonio Maria Osio spoke for those who did not want to become U.S. residents when he described himself as “a Californio who loves his country and a Mexican on all four sides and in my heart.” He opposed the annexation of California to the United States, and when it happened, he left, eventually settling in Baja California so that he could to remain a citizen of Mexico.
While many Americans debated Manifest Destiny in the Congress, the press, and the pulpits, other Americans, especially trappers and farmers, moved into the regions, just as a generation before the same types of people had expanded beyond the Mississippi. Regardless of whether the United States, Mexico, or Britain claimed the land, these frontiersmen and women were confident that, in time, their government would follow them. Most of all, they moved into Texas (see Map 11-1).
The Birth of the Texas Republic
The tensions between Americans living in Texas and the Mexican government that governed it had been building even before Mexico gained its independence from Spain in 1821. When the United States purchased Louisiana from France in 1803, the western
Chapter 11
Californio
Person of Spanish descent—and after 1821, citizen of Mexico—living in California.
Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 301
300 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land,
T
Saltillo MAP 11-1 Trade networks between Mexico, Texas, and the United States. Mexico (and before it, Spain) had established settlements and trade networks throughout its sparsely populated northern territories. Texas trade ran not only south from San Antonio and Goliad in Texas to Monterrey and other trading centers in Mexico but also east into the United States. Separate networks connected the heartland of Mexico with its settlements in Santa Fe and Taos in New Mexico, with Tucson in the future Arizona, and with the missions and presidios along the coast of California.
San Francisco n San Jose Santa Cruz (Branciforte);
San Carlos de Monterey
PACIFIC OCEAN
"f* Mission B Presidio • Town
-----Present-day political boundaries
—— Principal road
Present state names and boundaries provided for orientation Indian communities, including the New Mexico Pueblos, are not shown
Tejanos
People of Spanish or Mexican descent born in Texas.
border of the territory was disputed. Spain insisted it was the Sabine River (the current border between Louisiana and Texas), but French officials hinted that the United States might claim territory further west. Jefferson had wanted Louisiana to include all of the land from modern-day Texas to the Rio Grande River, but he was not prepared to fight Spain over it. In the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded Florida to the United States, along with Spanish claims to Oregon, in exchange for U.S. recognition of the Sabine River as the border between U.S. Louisiana and Spanish Texas, though some in Congress criticized the treaty for that reason. Despite treaties, however, Americans still crossed the Sabine in the early 19th century settling in Texas.
Soon after the Adams-Onis Treaty was signed, a revolutionary uprising began in Mexico. Like the people of the United States, most Mexican citizens wanted to be free of control by a European power. The Mexican revolution against Spanish rule, which lasted from 1810 to 1821, was long and bloody and decimated the Mexican economy In Texas, the Mexican population, people known as Tejanos, fell from 4,000 in 1800 to 2,500 in 1821. Comanche and Apache tribes dominated large parts of Texas, and
much of the desert was vacant of any human habitation. Nevertheless, after 1821, Mexico had won its independence.
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
With the establishment of the Republic of Mexico, two independent republics— the English-speaking, overwhelmingly Protestant United States in the north and the Spanish-speaking and mostly Catholic Republic of Mexico to the south—bordered each other at the Sabine River, with settlers from one living in the territory of the other.
Even before Mexican independence, the Spanish government had given Missouri merchant Moses Austin permission to start a colony in Texas, believing that more settlers—whatever their origin—would help stabilize a border area that was far from the population centers of either Mexico or the United States. In 1821, Moses’s son Stephen F. Austin, along with Erasmo Seguin, a Tejano with liberal political views, rode into Texas to build the new settlement. A month later, Austin and his party learned that Mexico had won its independence. Austin then went to Mexico City where he met with Mexico’s new leader Agustin de Iturbide and announced, “I make a tender of my services, my loyalty, and my fidelity to the Constitutional Emperor of Mexico.” Austin’s physical presence in Mexico City and willingness to make an oath of allegiance to the new nation impressed the new government. In April 1823, Austin received confirmation of his claims to a huge swath of land in Texas and his right to act as an empresario, or colonizing agent, for this land. He was the only American to get such rights.
At first, the new American colony grew slowly, but Austin continued to recruit settlers. The Mexican government, aware that it could do little to stop settlement and anxious for a buffer against Indian tribes and the United States, hoped that settlers in Texas would create a stable population of loyal citizens.
Few Europeans and even fewer Mexicans moved into Texas, but Americans came in large numbers. The Tejano community was overwhelmed by the newly arrived Americans. By 1830, 20,000 American colonists had arrived and had brought 2,000 slaves with them. The Americans generally ignored the requirement that they convert to Catholicism, though they did not build Protestant churches, and most absolutely refused to free their slaves in spite of the fact that Mexico had abolished slavery in 1829 and expected the residents of Texas to obey that decree. One American visitor to Texas, Amos Parker, wrote, “A person may travel all day; and day after day, and find Americans only.” Those in the Tejano community were also divided. Many Tejanos profited from trade with the Americans and identified with their independent streak. Others clung to their connection to Mexico. Distance, difficult travel conditions, and an unstable government in Mexico City with more pressing concerns closer to home allowed an American community to develop in Texas that was officially governed by one set of laws but lived by its own rules (see Map 11-2).
The Mexican government’s benign neglect of the American community in Texas ended in 1830 when the Mexican Congress closed Texas to further American immigration and the importation of slaves. Mexico also insisted that trade be routed through established ports further south in Mexico rather than directly between Texas and the United States. The government stationed more soldiers in Texas to enforce the new rules. Austin was stunned, and revolts broke out in the English-speaking colonies, a few of which drew Tejano support.
In 1832 Mexican troops defeated an American effort to take control of an army garrison, but in October, American colonists met at San Felipe and called for autonomy for Texas within the Republic of Mexico. In 1833, they organized an army under the command of Sam Houston and sent Austin to Mexico City to negotiate for them. Tejanos were not represented in these meetings, and most of the 5,000 Tejanos probably opposed these actions. But by now, there were 30,000 Americans in Texas, and the Tejanos were greatly outnumbered. Austin had little success in Mexico City. He was arrested in the fall of 1833 and at the time of his release from jail in the summer of 1835 he wrote, “War is our only recourse. There is no other remedy.” Most Americans in Texas seemed to agree.
empresario
An agent who received a land grant from the Spanish or Mexican government in return for organizing settlements.
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 303
San Francisco „ San Jose Santa Cruz (Branciforte)
PACIFIC
OCEAN
MAP 11-1 Trade networks between Mexico, Texas, and the United States. Mexico (and before it, Spain) had established settlements and trade networks throughout its sparsely populated northern territories. Texas trade ran not only south from San Antonio and Goliad in Texas to Monterrey and other trading centers in Mexico but also east into the United States. Separate networks connected the heartland of Mexico with its settlements in Santa Fe and Taos in New Mexico, with Tucson in the future Arizona, and with the missions and presidios along the coast of California.
■f Mission H Presidio • Town
---- Present-day political boundaries
—— Principal road
Present state names and boundaries
provided for orientation
Indian communities, including
the New Mexico Pueblos, are not shown
border of the territory was disputed. Spain insisted it was the Sabine River (the current border between Louisiana and Texas), but French officials hinted that the United States might claim territory further west. Jefferson had wanted Louisiana to include all of the land from modern-day Texas to the Rio Grande River, but he was not prepared to fight Spain over it. In the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded Florida to the United States, along with Spanish claims to Oregon, in exchange for U.S. recognition of the Sabine River as the border between U.S. Louisiana and Spanish Texas, though some in Congress criticized the treaty for that reason. Despite treaties, however, Americans still crossed the Sabine in the early 19th century settling in Texas.
Soon after the Adams-Onis Treaty was signed, a revolutionary uprising began in Mexico. Like the people of the United States, most Mexican citizens wanted to be free of control by a European power. The Mexican revolution against Spanish rule, which lasted from 1810 to 1821, was long and bloody and decimated the Mexican economy.
Tejanos	In Texas, the Mexican population, people known as Tejanos, fell from 4,000 in 1800
People of Spanish or Mexican descent born	to 2,500 in 1821. Comanche and Apache tribes dominated large parts of Texas, and
inTexas*	much of the desert was vacant of any human habitation. Nevertheless, after 1821,
Mexico had won its independence.
302 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
With the establishment of the Republic of Mexico, two independent republics— the English-speaking, overwhelmingly Protestant United States in the north and the Spanish-speaking and mostly Catholic Republic of Mexico to the south—bordered each other at the Sabine River, with settlers from one living in the territory of the other.
Even before Mexican independence, the Spanish government had given Missouri merchant Moses Austin permission to start a colony in Texas, believing that more settlers—whatever their origin—would help stabilize a border area that was far from the population centers of either Mexico or the United States. In 1821, Moses’s son Stephen F. Austin, along with Erasmo Seguin, a Tejano with liberal political views, rode into Texas to build the new settlement. A month later, Austin and his party learned that Mexico had won its independence. Austin then went to Mexico City where he met with Mexico’s new leader Agustin de Iturbide and announced, “I make a tender of my services, my loyalty, and my fidelity to the Constitutional Emperor of Mexico.” Austin’s physical presence in Mexico City and willingness to make an oath of allegiance to the new nation impressed the new government. In April 1823, Austin received confirmation of his claims to a huge swath of land in Texas and his right to act as an empresario, or colonizing agent, for this land. He was the only American to get such rights.
At first, the new American colony grew slowly, but Austin continued to recruit settlers. The Mexican government, aware that it could do little to stop settlement and anxious for a buffer against Indian tribes and the United States, hoped that settlers in Texas would create a stable population of loyal citizens.
Few Europeans and even fewer Mexicans moved into Texas, but Americans came in large numbers. The Tejano community was overwhelmed by the newly arrived Americans. By 1830, 20,000 American colonists had arrived and had brought 2,000 slaves with them. The Americans generally ignored the requirement that they convert to Catholicism, though they did not build Protestant churches, and most absolutely refused to free their slaves in spite of the fact that Mexico had abolished slavery in 1829 and expected the residents of Texas to obey that decree. One American visitor to Texas, Amos Parker, wrote, “A person may travel all day; and day after day, and find Americans only.” Those in the Tejano community were also divided. Many Tejanos profited from trade with the Americans and identified with their independent streak. Others clung to their connection to Mexico. Distance, difficult travel conditions, and an unstable government in Mexico City with more pressing concerns closer to home allowed an American community to develop in Texas that was officially governed by one set of laws but lived by its own rules (see Map 11-2).
The Mexican government’s benign neglect of the American community in Texas ended in 1830 when the Mexican Congress closed Texas to further American immigration and the importation of slaves. Mexico also insisted that trade be routed through established ports further south in Mexico rather than directly between Texas and the United States. The government stationed more soldiers in Texas to enforce the new rules. Austin was stunned, and revolts broke out in the English-speaking colonies, a few of which drew Tejano support.
In 1832 Mexican troops defeated an American effort to take control of an army garrison, but in October, American colonists met at San Felipe and called for autonomy for Texas within the Republic of Mexico. In 1833, they organized an army under the command of Sam Houston and sent Austin to Mexico City to negotiate for them. Tejanos were not represented in these meetings, and most of the 5,000 Tejanos probably opposed these actions. But by now, there were 30,000 Americans in Texas, and the Tejanos were greatly outnumbered. Austin had little success in Mexico City. He was arrested in the fall of 1833 and at the time of his release from jail in the summer of 1835 he wrote, “War is our only recourse. There is no other remedy. Most Americans in Texas seemed to agree.
empresario
An agent who received a land grant from the Spanish or Mexican government in return for organizing settlements.

Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 303
MAP 11-2 Contested boundaries between Texas and Mexico. The borders of Texas were highly contested in the 1830s and 1840s. The Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819 had fixed the border between the two nations as the Sabine River—the border between modern Louisiana and Texas. Austin's land grant from the Mexican government allowed him to settle to the west of that line. Most people considered the Nueces River to be the western border of the Republic of Texas in the 1830s and 1840s, but at President Polk's insistence, the Rio Grande River became the border as a result of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, which tripled the total size of Texas.
Although revolt had been brewing since 1830, the campaign for the independence of Texas became a full-fledged war late in 1835 when American volunteers captured the Alamo fortress at San Antonio de Bexar from its Mexican garrison. In January and February 1836, James Bowie and William Travis took joint command of the Alamo, while another Texian (as the Americans in Texas were called) force remained in the town of Goliad under the command of James Fannin. Austin went to Washington, D.C., to try to secure American support for the insurrection while Sam Houston took command of a volunteer army based at the Texian’s temporary capital of Washington-on-the-Brazos.
In response to these military actions, Mexican president Santa Anna ordered the Mexican army north, capturing the Alamo and killing its defenders in March 1836. After a furious fight, the nearly 200 defenders of the Alamo, including former Tennessee Congressman Davy Crockett, adventurer Jim Bowie, and the garrison’s commander William B. Travis, were killed. It is estimated that 600 Mexican soldiers were also killed in the assault. Ihe defeat and grisly deaths of the Alamo’s outnumbered defenders entered Texas—and American—legend. “Remember the Alamo!” became a rallying cry for the independence of Texas and later in the war with Mexico.
After his victory at the Alamo, Santa Anna marched his army to the second Texan garrison at Goliad, which surrendered in late March. Santa Anna ordered his soldiers to execute all of the Goliad troops and some 341, including the garrison’s commander James Fannin, died on the spot. For some, the phrase quickly became “Remember the Alamo and Goliad.”
While Texian volunteers fought against the Mexican army, political leaders in the American colony met in convention at Washington-on-the-Brazos and on March 2, 1836, declared the independence of the Republic of Texas and adopted a constitution.
Having defeated the insurgent forces at the Alamo and at Goliad, Santa Anna had little use for the Texas declaration. He turned on Sam Houston’s army, the only remaining defenders of the Republic of Texas and its new constitution. Houston, mindful of Santa Anna’s strength, began a slow retreat. Then, after Santa Anna’s troops had been marching for days with an increasingly thin supply line, Houston suddenly turned on them. On April 21, 1836, Houston defeated Santa Anna at the Battle of San Jacinto. Houston’s troops showed no more mercy than Santa Anna had and executed hundreds of Mexican prisoners. The next day, Santa Anna himself was captured and forced to sign the Treaty of Velasco, promising to withdraw all Mexican troops from Texas, end the war, and recognize the independence of Texas. The Mexican Congress refused to recognize the treaty, but neither the Mexican government nor the Texians were in the mood for more fighting.
In the early fall of 1836, Sam Houston, the hero of the Battle of San Jacinto, was elected president of the new republic, defeating Austin, who became secretary of state. Both men, and most of their followers, did not want long-term independence but rather annexation by the United States. However, the United States was a reluctant partner. Texas would be a new huge slave state, and many in Washington worried about the destabilizing impact on the nation of having such a powerful addition to the slave states in the U.S. Senate. In addition, U.S. trade with Mexico was too important to trifle with. Even Andrew Jackson did not want to risk the political cost of annexing Texas, especially in 1836 when Martin Van Buren, his handpicked successor, was in the midst of the presidential election. After the election, Jackson, a good friend of
Alamo
A
Franciscan mission at San Antonio, Texas, that was the site in 1836 of a siege and massacre of Texans by Mexican troops. 304
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Sam Houston, officially recognized the Republic of Texas, but that was as far as its neighbor to the north would go. The Texas Republic would stand on its own for the immediate future.
Distant California
While Texas was declaring its independence from Mexico, Alta California, as it was known to distinguish it from Baja California to the south, was a sleepy and distant outpost of the Republic of Mexico, and most people in Mexico and the United States were content to leave it that way. California had wonderful harbors, large and prosperous rancheros, and a string of missions, but it was a long way from the heart of either nation. In the 1830s, the population there included not only Mexicans, most of whom valued self-government in local matters and cared little for the authorities in Mexico City, but also a much smaller number of Americans. Neither group was thinking seriously about independence. A majority among the declining number of American Indians in California were doing their best to maintain their tribal ways and keep their distance from both Mexican and American settlers, though some of them were living under the supervision of the missions.
Although Spanish explorers had sailed the coast of California and claimed the lands in the 16th century, meaningful European settlements in California began only in the mid-18th century, just before the American Revolution. In 1769, a Franciscan priest, Father Junipero Serra, was sent to Alta California with instructions to found a chain of missions that would aid in converting the California Indians to Catholic Christianity, put them to work for the Spanish, and establish a stronger Spanish presence to protect against possible Russian expansion.
Father Serra and his Franciscan successors succeeded in establishing a chain of missions stretching from San Diego to San Francisco. The Franciscan friars meant to save the Indian souls and bring them the gifts of Spanish culture, but they also worked them hard to ensure a good economic return for the missions, maintaining tight control and a tough discipline. One of the Franciscan friars noted, however, that the Indians “live well free but as soon as we reduce them to a Christian and community life... they fatten, sicken, and die.” When Serra arrived in California, there were probably 300,000 Indians in the area, but by the time Spanish rule ended in 1821, that number had been reduced to 200,000. From the Spanish government’s perspective, however, the missions were significant in asserting sovereignty as they controlled the Indian work force and managed the colony’s cattle, grain, and trade.
The Franciscans administered the California missions until 1833 when the Mexican government, which had seized power from Spain in 1821, transferred ownership of the missions from church to state and eventually to private hands. Mexico’s revolution was partly a rejection not only of Spanish royal authority but also of the power of the Catholic Church, and seizing the missions was a means to that end. Missions were sold off or awarded to powerful ranchers.
As late as 1821, California’s total Mexican population was about 3,000, though it grew to between 10,000 and 15,000 by 1846. The majority lived on large ranches spread along the coast. Some few immigrants from the United States also moved to California in these years. Most of the Americans arriving before 1840 learned Spanish, converted to Catholicism, took on Mexican citizenship, and became part of the local culture of Alta California.
Beginning in the 1840s, however, a different group of immigrants from the United States began to arrive who were more interested in making California part of the United States. Even before the war with Mexico began, President Polk, well aware of the interests of these recent immigrants to California, told Congress that California s harbors “would afford shelter for our navy, for our numerous whale ships, and other merchant vessels employed in the Pacific Ocean, and would in a short period become the marts of an extensive and profitable commerce with China, and other countries of
Chapter 11
11.1
112
An early photograph of a young Mexican American woman illustrates some of the comfort and confidence that the Californios had before their homes became part of the United States. Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 305

American Voices
Eulalia Perez, Memories of Mexican California, ca. 1830s
ulalia Perez was born about 1768 in Baja California. She and her husband first moved to the Alta California mission of San Diego and then to San Gabriel near Los Angeles. At San Gabriel, the priests selected her as cook for the mission where she also served as a midwife and eventually "keeper of the keys" or mayordoma— head of the mission household. Perez lived a long life, and in 1877, a historian at the University of California interviewed her on her memories of a much earlier era in California history. Her account provides a rare glimpse of mission life in California before that area's acquisition by the United States.
When we arrived here, Father Jose Sanchez lodged me and my family temporarily in a small house until work could be found for me....He, as well as his companion Father Jose Maria Zalvidea, treated the Indians very well, and the two were much loved by the Spanish-speaking people and by the neophytes [Indians recently converted to Christianity] and other Indians.
Father Zalvidea introduced many improvements in the Mission of San Gabriel and made it progress a very great deal in every way. Not content with providing abundantly for the neophytes, he planted [fruit] trees in the mountains, far away from the mission, in order that the untamed Indians might have food when they passed by those spots....
In the morning the girls were let out. First they went to Father Zalvidea's Mass, for he spoke the Indian language; afterwards they went to the mess hut to have breakfast, which sometimes consisted of corn gruel with chocolate, and on holidays with sweets and bread. On other days, ordinarily they had boiled barley and beans and meat. After breakfast each girl began the task that had been assigned to her beforehand—sometimes it was at the looms, or unloading, or sewing, or whatever there was to be done....
The Indians were taught the various jobs for which they showed an aptitude. Others worked in the fields, or took care of the horses, cattle, etc. Still others were carters, oxherds, etc.... The Indians also were taught to pray. A few of the more intelligent ones were taught to read and write. Father Zalvidea taught the Indians to pray in their Indian tongue; some Indians learned music and played instruments and sang at Mass. The sextons and pages who helped with Mass were Indians of the mission.
The punishments that were meted out were the stocks and confinement. When the misdemeanor was serious, the delinquent was taken to the guard, where they tied him to a pipe or a post and gave him twenty-five or more lashes, depending on his crime. Sometimes they put them in the head-stocks; other times they passed a musket from one leg to the other and fastened it there, and also they tied their hands. That punishment, called "the Law of Bayone," was very painful. But Fathers Sanchez and Zalvidea were always very considerate with the Indians. I would not want to say what others did because they did not live in the mission.
Source: Eulalia Perez, from an original manuscript in Spanish in the Bancroft Library, University of California, Berkeley originally written in 1877 and published in Nancy F. Cott, et al, Roots of Bitterness: Documents of the Social History of American Women (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1996), pp. 185-192.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How would you characterize Perez's view of the mission system? How did she respond to its coercive elements?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What assumptions about Indian peoples underlie Perez's account? What to her were the signs of progress in California?
the East. Polks Secretary of the Navy George Bancroft anticipated the coming of war with Mexico and ordered Commodore John D. Sloat, commander of the U.S. Pacific squadron, based in the nation of Hawaii, to land in San Francisco if war came. At the same time, U.S. Army Captain John C. Fremont led what he claimed was a military map-making expedition overland from St. Louis, arriving in Monterey, California, in late December 1845. Fremont told the Mexican authorities he was simply exploring. They had their doubts that he was just making maps—doubts that later turned out to be well founded—but allowed him to remain. Then in April 1846, a U.S. warship arrived at Monterey, with orders for Fremont and the U.S. counsel in California, Thomas Oliver Larkin, to stir up a pro-American revolt in California. The once distant outpost was quickly becoming an important focus of attention in the growing tensions between the United States and Mexico.
Manifest Destiny and American Presidential Politics
The creation of the Democratic Party as a vehicle to continue his political philosophy and support his handpicked successors was one of Jacksons most significant achievements.
,	.	1116 twin Pillars on which the party rested were a small federal government and the idea of
306 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Manifest Destiny. The political parties that had emerged from the John Adams-Thomas Jefferson presidential election—the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans —were long gone. Americas founding generation, including all presidents up to John Quincy Adams, disliked party spirit, even if they accepted that spirit when it helped them. Martin Van Buren, who had built on the base of the older Democratic-Republican organizations to create the new Democratic Party that elected Jackson and who followed him as its candidate, had no such reservations. He thought it best “to deal with the subject of Political Parties in a sincerer and wiser spirit—to recognize their necessity [and] to give them the credit they deserve.”
As part of their effort to build a strong political party, Jackson and Van Buren called the first national political convention to be held by a major party. The event was held in Baltimore in 1835, a year before the presidential election. (The small Anti-Masonic Party actually held the first national political convention, modeled on a religious revival in 1831, but it won only seven electoral votes in the 1832 election and faded from national prominence thereafter.) The Democrats borrowed the idea of a national convention as part of their preparation for the 1836 election, and their tight political organization allowed the Democrats to win most presidential contests until the Civil War when the party splintered. At the 1835 convention, Jackson stage-managed Van Buren’s nomination as the Democratic party’s candidate for what some said was basically a third term for Jackson. The outgoing president also managed to ensure the nomination of his hand-picked candidate for vice president, Richard Mentor Johnson of Kentucky, in spite of an effort by Virginias delegates to derail his nomination.
Ihe core principle of the emerging Whig Party was opposition to Jackson, though it also wanted a larger federal government that could manage internal improvements. The Whigs continued to support a Bank of the United States. But the Whigs disliked Van Buren’s ideas of political parties and continued to distrust the growing sense of party spirit, or at least said that they did. Given this distrust, the Whigs were not well enough organized to have a national convention in preparation for the 1836 election relying instead on state conventions. They reasoned that, even if the various states did not nominate the same candidate for president, they might use a number of popular candidates to gain enough electoral votes to throw the election into the House of Representatives where they were confident they could control the outcome. Having lost decisively with Henry Clay in 1832, most Whig leaders wanted a different candidate. One choice, popular in the North and West, was William Henry Harrison, who had won as many battles as Jackson during the War of 1812. Some states duly nominated Harrison, and Clay reluctantly supported him. Southern Whigs nominated Hugh Lawson White of Tennessee, who agreed with Jackson on many issues but had broken with him over what he saw as Jackson’s abuse of power. Whigs in Massachusetts went their own way with Senator Daniel Webster. The Whig effort to appeal to diverse constituencies with different candidates failed. In November 1836, the Jackson magic stuck to Van Buren and he received 50.79 percent of the popular vote and 170 electoral votes against 124 votes scattered among the three Whig candidates.
Van Buren faced several challenges as he began to govern. He pledged to continue Jackson’s policies and did so, in particular, presiding over the final removal of the Cherokees to Oklahoma and a long and bloody war against Seminoles in Florida. Given his difficulties with the Seminoles, Van Buren decided against removing Iroquois tribes from New York. He avoided a war with Britain when rebels in Canada recruited volunteers along the American side of the Great Lakes. In spite of his ties to the party of Manifest Destiny, he had no inclination to deal with Texas or Oregon.
In addition, issues of nullification and abolitionism continued, unresolved. Like Jackson, Van Buren opposed nullification or any effort to disrupt the Union. He also opposed abolitionism, which, despite his northern roots, he saw as another attack on the Union along with nullification. Southerners supported Van Buren, and he repaid them by supporting a gag rule in Congress. The Constitution gave all citizens the
Chapter 11
gag rule
A procedural rule passed in the House of Representatives that prevented discussion of antislavery petitions from 1836 to 1844.
Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 307
Panic of 1837
A major economic downturn brought on by temporary excesses in international trade and the inability of the United States to control the currency or make credit available after the closing of the Second Bank of the United States.
Specie Circular
A proclamation issued by President Andrew Jackson in 1836 stipulating that only gold or silver could be used as payment for public land.
right to “petition the government for a redress of grievances, and abolitionists had begun flooding the House and Senate with antislavery petitions. Ihe gag rule was a promise by congressional leaders in the House of Representatives to ignore the abolitionist petitions. In the end, the gag rule only highlighted the divisions over slavery. As a member of the House, John Quincy Adams took it upon himself to undermine the rule in every possible way. He saw it as a limitation on the constitutional rights of abolitionists, and they came to view him as “Old Man Eloquent.” Through the 1830s and 1840s, Adams and a handful of like-minded Whigs began to introduce antislavery petitions at each session of Congress before the House adopted its rules, including the gag rule. Then, during sessions, he regularly interrupted other debates to ask the Speaker whether this or that petition ran afoul of the gag rule while knowing full well that it did but using the occasion to describe both the petition and the gag rule. Perhaps more effectively than if there had been no rule, Adams used these manipulations of the gag rule to change public opinion on slavery, even if he could not get the votes he wanted from the House.
Most challenging for Van Buren’s political fortunes, however, was the fact that some of the economic policies Jackson had advocated had their greatest impact during Van Buren’s term and it was not a good one. Only 2 months after Van Buren’s inauguration, the Panic of 1837 hit the country. The initial cause of the panic was a sudden drying up of credit. Without the ability to borrow money, cotton brokers failed, banks failed, and the great New York mercantile house of Arthur Tappan and Company failed. In his hatred of banks and distrust of debt, Jackson had paid off the national debt—sending a great deal of U.S. currency to bond holders in Britain and reducing the currency available in the United States. Jackson also had closed the Second Bank of the United States, which had held the ability to expand credit when it was needed. In addition, he had issued a Specie Circular in 1836, requiring speculators to pay for federal land in silver or gold coinage, not bank notes. The Specie Circular reflected Jackson’s distrust of banks, but once the economy began to decline in 1837, many Americans started to think that if the U.S. government would not trust bank notes, then they should not either. There was a run on banks, and few banks had sufficient reserves of silver and gold to redeem all of the bank notes they had issued. Banks failed, and credit became even scarcer, crippling the economy.
Soon after Jackson left office, the Panic of 1837, which many blamed on him, wracked the nation. In this political cartoon, the results of Jackson's economic policies are shown as drunkenness, women begging a rich banker for money, and long lines of the unemployed.
308 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
A second panic hit in 1839, this one the result of overspeculation in cotton and cotton-producing land. When British investments and international trade stalled, the value of cotton, land, and slaves all plummeted. The sale of public lands, and federal revenue from these sales, virtually stopped. Northern textile and shoe industries laid off thousands of workers. More banks closed. The panic lasted until 1843 and was arguably as severe as any economic downturn before the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Given his Jacksonian commitment to small government, there was little that Van Buren could or would do about the economy. His position enabled the Whigs in the 1840 election to describe him as “cold and heartless.” The Whigs had also learned from the Democrats. In 1840, they held a single national convention that unified them behind one candidate. For a second time, they pinned their hopes on the aging war hero William Henry Harrison, despite Clay’s effort to secure the nomination for himself. They nominated John Tyler of Virginia, who had served as governor and senator, for vice president, an ill-fated choice. Tyler brought balance to the ticket—he was from the South while Harrison was from the North, and at age 50, he was much younger than the 68-year-old Harrison. But Tyler was a Whig only because he found Jackson “high handed,” not because he disagreed with most of his policies. The 1840 political campaign pitted Martin Van Buren, running for a second term, against “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too,” a reference to Harrison’s victory at the Battle of Tippecanoe in 1811. This time, the Whigs won with 52.8 percent of the popular votes and 234 electoral votes against only 60 for Van Buren. But the high expectations for the Whig presidency would not last long.
At his inauguration in March 1841, Harrison delivered a long address laying out the Whig agenda; in fact, it was the longest inaugural address in American presidential history. The day was cold and blustery, and Harrison did not wear a coat. He caught a bad cold that turned to pneumonia. A month later, President Harrison was dead and Tyler was president. This instance marked the first time a president had died in office, and Tyler made it clear that he was not just an “acting president” but that he had inherited the presidency for the full term. A worse disaster for the Whig Party was hard to imagine. The election of 1840 was the only time when the country elected a Whig president and Whig majorities in both houses of Congress. After only a month into the new administration, “Tyler Too,” who shared little of the Whig agenda beyond an intense dislike of Andrew Jackson and an interest in holding office, was president.
Before he became seriously ill, President Harrison had called a special session of Congress to deal with the economic crisis. When the Whig-dominated Congress convened, it re-created the Bank of the United States so that there could be federal control of the currency and credit, thus easing economic conditions that had been created when the bank had been abolished. President Tyler, a believer in small government every bit as much as Jackson or Van Buren, vetoed the bill. Congress then created a “fiscal corporation” that would have more limited powers. Tyler vetoed that, too. Tyler did sign the Land Act of 1841, which made it much easier for homesteaders to buy federal land or keep land on which they were squatters, and he signed the first federal Bankruptcy Act. But the Whigs were furious at Tyler. In September 1841, the entire cabinet except for Secretary of State Daniel Webster resigned in protest over the veto of the bank bills, and the Whig congressional caucus expelled Tyler from the party, marking the only time in U.S. history that a president was expelled from his own political party.
Expanding the size of the United States remained an issue throughout the Tyler presidency. Webster had refused to resign as secretary of state primarily because he was negotiating with Britain to resolve a dispute that came dangerously close to war over where to locate the border between Maine and Canada. The Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842 resolved the border with Canada as far west as Minnesota. Tyler supported Webster because he did not want problems with Britain when he turned to his real priority—Texas.
11.1
1 n.2
J 11,3
Webster-Ashburton Treaty
The treaty signed by the United States and Britain in 1842 that settled a boundary dispute between the United States and Canada and provided for closer cooperation in suppressing the African slave trade.
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 309
Tyler had two paramount goals—the annexation of Texas and his own reelection. He failed at the latter but not the former. In September 1843, Tyler began secret negotiations with Texas over annexation. In April 1844, Tyler’s new Secretary of State John C. Calhoun, who was also a Whig only because of his hatred for Jackson over the nullification issue, presented a treaty to the Senate for the annexation of Texas. Calhoun justified the treaty in explicitly proslavery terms, insisting that if the United States did not annex Texas as a slave state, Britain would take it over and end slavery there, blocking the expansion of U.S. slavery. But the nation’s leading Whig, Henry Clay, and former Democratic President Martin Van Buren both announced their opposition to annexation largely because of slavery. The Senate rejected the treaty by an overwhelming vote of 35 to 16.
Ihe link between Texas and slavery doomed the presidential hopes of both Tyler and Calhoun since both were seen as using a political gimmick to gain their way. The Whigs nominated their old hero Henry Clay. Having been expelled by the Whigs, Tyler tried for the Democratic nomination, but the party spurned him. Jackson still dominated the Democratic Party. He would not allow Tyler to be their candidate, and Jackson was furious at Van Buren over Van Buren’s opposition to the annexation of Texas. As a result, the Democrats ended up nominating Jackson’s choice, a political unknown, James K. Polk of Tennessee, instead of their own former president Martin Van Buren.
James K. Polk was a true “dark horse” in American presidential politics. He had served as speaker of the house from 1835 to 1839 but had twice been defeated for governor of Tennessee. Few besides Jackson thought he would be president. His Whig opponent, Henry Clay, was one of the best-known political leaders in the United States. If Van Buren had been the Democratic nominee, the election would have been fought over Clay’s support for federally financed internal improvements and his advocacy for the Bank of the United States, both of which Van Buren opposed. Polk’s nomination changed everything. The Democratic Party platform called for “the reoccupation of Oregon and the reannexation of Texas.” With Polk as their nominee, the Democrats planned to focus the election on Manifest Destiny, claiming that they were the party of national expansion while painting the Whigs as timid defenders of the status quo. This focus on Manifest Destiny, especially as it applied to Texas, assured Polk the support not only of Jackson but also of President Tyler and of Calhoun’s pro-slavery partners who included both Whigs and Democrats in the South. Many Catholics also saw the Whigs as a Protestant party, while the Democrats courted Catholic voters, especially recent immigrants. Most of the country’s Catholics voted Democratic, especially in Pennsylvania and New York. In the end, Polk won 170 electoral votes to 105 for Clay. Expansion in Oregon and Texas was going to be at the top of Polk’s agenda.
Because the new president would not take office until March 4 (the practice from the country’s beginning until passage of the Twentieth Amendment in 1933), Tyler still had 4 months to serve in office. He did not waste them. When the Senate had rejected the annexation of Texas in 1844, it had rejected a treaty with the Republic of Texas. But the Constitution provided that while treaties had to be ratified by two-thirds of the Senate, a new state could be admitted by a majority vote in each house of Congress. Up to this point, all new states had been U.S. territories, not separate sovereign countries. There was no precedent for incorporating another country into the United States. Now Tyler, with Jackson’s advice and Polk’s support, tried a new approach: simply admit Texas as a state. The idea worked. Instead of a treaty with Texas, which required a two-thirds vote in the Senate that Tyler could not get, both houses of Congress passed a resolution admitting Texas as a state in February 1845, leaving it to the president to negotiate the Texas border with Mexico (see Map 11-2). Five senators, led by Missouri s Thomas Hart Benton, who had opposed annexation, now supported the statehood resolution based on a promise that President Polk would conduct the negotiations about the Texas border. Tyler did not feel bound by the promise. On March 1, 1845, with 4 days left in office, Tyler signed the resolution admitting Texas, sent envoys to Texas
310 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
offering immediate statehood without any negotiations, and held a gala White House party to celebrate the admission of the new state to the union. Benton was furious, and most Whigs were equally distraught. Three days later on March 4, 1845, James K. Polk was inaugurated as president of a nation that considered Texas to be one of its states, even if Mexico did not agree.
54° 40' or Fight—The United States and Oregon
Until the mid-1830s, few Americans had followed the route of the Lewis and Clark expedition and explored or settled in Oregon. The Canadian Hudsons Bay Company dominated the fur business in Oregon, and Indian tribes traded furs to the company for rifles and other goods. While American political debates seemed fixated on Texas, Oregon was generally ignored by the press or in Congress. The lack of interest in Oregon began to change in July 1836 when some 70 people traveled through a pass in the Rocky Mountains into what is now Wyoming. Some of the group, including four Protestant missionaries, settled in the fertile farming areas of the Willamette Valley south of the Columbia River in present-day Oregon. Two of those missionaries, Marcus and Narcissa Whitman, also became first-rate publicists for beauties of the Oregon Territory (see Map 11-3).
11.1
’ Oregon Trail	—»* Southern Overland Trail
’ Bozeman Trail —« Old Spanish Trail ' California Trail —— Taos Trail ' Mormon Trail — Santa Fe Trail
MAP 11-3 Westward Trails. Beginning at places like St. Louis or Independence, Missouri, or Council Bluffs,
Iowa, a variety of trails were used by early American migrants seeking new homes in not only Oregon but
also territory claimed by the Republic of Mexico from Texas to California.
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 311
American Voices
The Letters of Narcissa Whitman, 1836-1847
arcissa Whitman and her physician husband Marcus were sent by the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions to establish a mission to the Cayuse Indians near what is now Walla Walla, Washington, in 1836. The mission converted few Cayuse. But Narcissa's letters home and her husband's speaking tours encouraged white settlement in the Oregon territory, settlement that alienated Indians but led to a strong American presence in the area. Although the letters were filled with descriptions of the hardships of the journey across the Rocky Mountains and the difficulty of life in Oregon, Narcissa's praise of the beauty and fertility of the land made the greatest impact.
September 12. [1836] What a delightful place this is; what a contrast to the rough, barren sand plains, through which we had so recently passed. Here we find fruit of every description, apples, peaches, grapes, pears, plums, and fig trees in abundance; also cucumbers, melons, beans, peas, beets, cabbage, tomatoes and every kind of vegetable too numerous to be mentioned. Every part is very neat and tastefully arranged, with fine walks, lined on each side with strawberry vines. At the opposite end of the garden is a good summer house covered with grape vines.
Dec. 26th. [1836] It is indeed, a lovely situation. We are on a beautiful level—a peninsula formed by the branches of the Walla Walla river, upon the base of which our house stands, on the southeast corner, near the shore of the main river. To run a fence across to the opposite river, on the north from our house—this, with the river, would enclose 300 acres of good land for cultivation, all directly under the eye. The rivers are barely skirted with timber. This is all the woodland we can see; beyond them, as far as the eye can reach, plains and mountains appear. On the east, a few rods from the house, is a range of small hills, covered with bunchgrass—a very excellent food for animals, and upon which they subsist during winter, even digging it from under the snow.
Waiilatpu, Oregon Territory [The Whitman Mission near Walla Walla]
August 23. [1847] For the last two weeks immigrants have been passing, probably 80 or 100 wagons have already passed and 1,000 are said to be on the road, besides the Mormons.. .The poor Indians are amazed at the overwhelming numbers of Americans coming into the country. They seem not to know what to make of it. Very many of the principal ones are dying, and...[t]he remaining ones seem attached to us, and cling to us the closer; cultivate their farms quite extensively, and do not wish to see any Sniapus (Americans) settle among them here.
The Cayuse Indians, who were the focus of the Whitman Mission, were indeed "amazed at the overwhelming numbers of Americans coming into the country." When, as a result of the immigration, a measles epidemic struck in 1847, the amazement turned to anger. The Whitmans provided medical care to Indian and white children, but many Cayuse still died. In November 1847, the Cayuse Chief Tiloukaikt led a party that killed both Whitmans and burned the mission. In response, a white militia attacked the Cayuse. Two years later, Tiloukaikt was executed for the murder of the Whitmans. From the gallows he said, "Did not your missionaries teach us that Christ died to save his people? So we die to save our people." Disease and white raids so weakened the Cayuse that they could not continue as an independent nation, and they merged into the Nez Perce and Yakima tribes.
Source: www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/program/resources/archives/two/whitman 1 .htm#120536 www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/program/resources/archives/twowhitman2.htm#040447 The Letters of Narcissa Whitman, 1836-1847 (Fairfield, WA: YeGalleon Press, 1986).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
On what aspects of the land did Narcissa focus? Why?
2.	Comparison
How might the Cayuse Indians have seen the land? How might their view have differed from that of Narcissa?
The Whitmans’ letters about Oregon did much to attract further American settlement, but the claim to the Oregon Territory had been shared by the United States and Britain since a series of treaties negotiated by then Secretary of State John Quincy Adams between 1818 and 1824 created the joint American-British governance of Oregon (see Chapter 8). The Oregon Territory stretched along the Pacific coast from the northern border of Spanish-Mexican California to the southern border of what was then Russian America, (now Alaska) and included the present U.S. states of Oregon, Washington, and Idaho as well as the Canadian province of British Columbia and the Yukon Territory. By the 1840s, both governments wanted to resolve the border and end the joint ownership of the territory.
In the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842, the United States and Britain had already negotiated a U.S.-Canadian border at the 49th parallel from the Great Lakes west to the beginning of Oregon. Continuing that border west would split the Oregon Territory
312 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
114
Fort Vancouver on the north shore of the Columbia River in present day Washington state was a beautiful site, shown in this 1848 lithograph, after an 1845 drawing by Lieutenant Henry J. Warre of Native Americans gathered in front of the fort. Pictures like this, along with Narcissa Whitman's letters did much to popularize the Oregon-Washington region.

between the two countries. Tyler’s ambassador in London proposed making the 49th parallel the boundary all the way to the Pacific but giving the British the southern tip of Vancouver Island, sliced by the 49th parallel, and giving both countries the right to navigate the Juan de Fuca Strait between Vancouver and the mainland. It seemed like a straightforward compromise. Polk, however, wanted more, or pretended to.
In his 1844 campaign, Polk promised to win all of Oregon up to the Alaskan border, or 54°40' in terms of latitude. But Polk needed his army for the war that he expected to have with Mexico and did not want to fight Britain, too. The coalition that elected him was divided about Oregon. Calhoun and the southern planters would have happily given all of Oregon to Britain. They did not want a war or even tension to interrupt the cotton trade with Britain that was making the South wealthy. In addition, from Calhoun’s perspective, any future states carved out of the Oregon Territory would most likely be free states, tipping the balance in the Senate against southern interests. But Missouri’s powerful Senator Thomas Hart Benton was growing fond of Oregon because the trail from Independence, Missouri, to Oregon was adding wealth to his state. Polk had promised 54°40', and Benton meant to hold him to it. John Quincy Adams, now a power in the House of Representatives, agreed with Benton. Although he was opposed to annexing Texas because of slavery, Adams was still an American expansionist, he liked the region for all the reasons Calhoun disliked it, and he wanted Oregon in the Union.
The British government, led by Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel, also wanted compromise that would support the Hudson’s Bay Company but guarantee an uninterrupted flow of American cotton to British mills and avoid war with the United States. Peel also faced other issues that were more pressing than Oregon. But others in London wanted more of Oregon and insisted that the southern border of British
Oregon should be the Columbia River, which created the so-called “disputed triangle °f land that both nations claimed.
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 313
———
11.1
n.2
Ihe Peel and Polk administrations eventually compromised along the 49th parallel (the current border) in spring 1846. The agreement was an obvious compromise, particularly for the United States, but it meant that the United States was free to pursue actions that Polk considered more important. As the Democratic New York Herald said, “We can now thrash Mexico into decency at our leisure.”
113
11.1
Quick Review Why was annexing Texas more controversial than dividing the Oregon Territory? Discuss at least two major factors.
THE U.S. WAR WITH MEXICO,
1846-1848 n.2
Analyze the causes, strategies, and outcomes of the U.S. War with Mexico.
Two years before Presidents Tyler and Polk had managed the U.S. annexation of Texas, Mexico had warned the United States that such a move would mean war because Mexico still claimed the territory. One week after Tyler signed the annexation legislation, the Mexican ambassador in Washington declared the move “an act of aggression,” and Mexico severed diplomatic relations with the United States.
Although the vote to make Texas a state of the United States was passed and celebrated in Washington in March of 1845, Texas did not ratify the agreement until July 1845, and Congress did not ratify the Texas decision until December. Meanwhile, Mexican President Jose Joaquin Herrera, a political moderate, agreed to negotiate with the United States. He knew his country did not have the resources to fight a war, but he also knew that public opinion in his country would never accept the loss of Texas, particularly the larger area of Texas going all the way to the Rio Grande that the United States now claimed. Polk sent former Louisiana Congressman John Slidell to Mexico City to negotiate.
Fighting the War in Texas and Mexico, Responding to Resistance
Although there were tensions between Americans and the government of Mexico from Texas to California, the heart of the concerns in 1846 had to do with Texas. While leaders in both countries negotiated about whether the United States could annex Texas, another question loomed: just what constituted Texas? The Republic of Texas had never governed any land west of the Nueces River. Many in the United States and Mexico considered that river to be the western boundary of Texas. But Polk and many Texans claimed that the Rio Grande was the border, a claim that made Texas a much bigger state (see Map 11-2). Herrera would never accept that claim. Moreover, Polk really wanted not only Texas as far as the Rio Grande but also New Mexico and California. He would purchase it if he could, but he also considered a war as a viable way to secure that land.
While the negotiations continued, Polk ordered General Zachary Taylor to cross the Louisiana-Texas border at the Sabine River in June 1845 and from there continue to approach as near the boundary line, the Rio Grande, as prudence will dictate.” Taylor was indeed a prudent general, and he initially moved only as far as the Nueces where he halted at Corpus Christi to train his 4,000 troops. But his orders were clear: any Mexican movement across the Rio Grande would be considered an act of war. It took almost a year for Polk to get his war, but in April 1846, Taylor’s army moved to the northern edge of the Rio Grande. On April 25,1846,11 Americans were killed in a battle with Mexican troops who had crossed the Rio Grande. Polk was delighted when Taylor reported that hostilities may now be considered as commenced.” In his war message to Congress on May 11,1846, Polk said, “Mexico.. .has invaded our territory and shed American blood upon the American soil... .War exists.. .by the act of Mexico herself.”
314 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
The artist Richard Caton Woodville's painting War News from Mexico captured the interest and, in some cases, surprise that came as news of the war reached people in most parts of the United States much more quickly than ever before, thanks primarily to the spread of telegraph lines that transmitted information faster than ever previously possible.
Not everyone in Congress agreed. Most Whigs opposed war, though they wanted to support the American troops who might be in harm’s way and worried about being seen as unpatriotic. Kentucky Whig Garrett David said, “It is our own President who began this war. He has been carrying it on for months.” Ihe key vote on the war passed the House 123 to 67, though many Democrats did not want to be seen as opposing their party’s president and a subsequent vote formalizing the declaration of war carried the House by 174 to 14 with 35 abstentions. In the Senate, the key test of strength carried only by 26 to 20, but a subsequent vote that included funds financing the war carried 40 to 2 with 3 abstentions. President Polk declared that a state ofwar existed between the United States and Mexico on May 13,1846.
The war that a divided Congress declared was fought by a divided nation. Polk and his supporters expected a quick victory. Senator Thomas Hart Benton wrote that the president wanted “a small war, just large enough to require a treaty of peace, and not large enough to make military reputations dangerous for the presidency.” Polk got a longer and more costly war than he bargained for—one that also produced more military heroes.
The war provoked strong opposition. A decade before it began, John Quincy Adams warned Congress that the annexation of Texas would bring on a war in which the United States would be in the wrong, saying:
“Sirs, the banners of freedom will be the banners of Mexico; and your banners, I blush to speak the word, will be the banners of slavery.” A decade later, Adams voted against the war in the House of Representatives.
Once the war began, others, including Congressman Abraham Lincoln
of Illinois, joined Adams in opposition. An aspiring Whig politician from Illinois, Lincoln voiced his suspicions about the war. He thought that President Polk “is deeply conscious of being in the wrong.. .that he ordered General Taylor into the midst of a peaceful Mexican settlement, purposely to bring on a war.” Some of those in the field agreed. In Texas, a young Lieutenant Colonel Ethan Hitchcock noted in his diary that “It looks as if the government sent a small force on purpose to bring on a war, so as to have a pretext fort taking California and as much of this country as it chooses.”
Perhaps the most influential response to the war with Mexico came from a poet rather than a politician. While he is remembered today mostly for his reflective stay at Walden Pond, Henry David Thoreau also believed that the war with Mexico was immoral. In a pamphlet titled Civil Disobedience, Thoreau wrote, “I meet this American government, or its representative the State government, directly, and face to face, once a year, no more, in the person of its tax-gatherer.” Thoreau saw the demand for his tax money as the opportunity to resist what he saw as the government s injustice and refused to pay his tax, a portion of which would go to support what he considered to be an unjust and immoral war. He was arrested and spent a night in the town jail in Concord before someone, to his frustration, paid the tax for him. But his willingness to face arrest for his convictions and the pamphlet that he wrote explaining his actions made Thoreau not only one of the most famous opponents of the War with Mexico but a model of civil disobedience for generations to come, in the United States and elsewhere.
In the first battles of the war, Taylor defeated a larger Mexican force and occupied Ihe Mexican town of Matamoros in May 1846. The Mexican army fought bravely, but the Americans had superior technology-rifles that shot farther and better artillery.
The U.S. Navy blockaded Mexican ports on the Gulf and Pacific coasts, so Mexico could not import supplies from abroad. Taylor’s army moved slowly into Mexico, but heat and disease took a heavier toll than battles. One in eight U.S. soldiers died in a 6 week encampment in the Mexican city of Camargo even though no battles took place there. If the troops, especially the volunteers, had learned to fill canteens upstream
from where horses were washed, the death toll would have been far lower. Then in
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 315
rti;
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Considering Henry David Thoreau
Henry David Thoreau (1817-1862) published "On the Duty of Civil Disobedience" in 1849. The essay has at least two themes: Thoreau's opposition to most, if not all, government and his belief that civil disobedience—in this case breaking an immoral law—was the right thing to do. Thoreau's belief in civil disobedience—refusing to obey an unjust law and a willingness to face the consequences—have made Thoreau a model for others who advocated civil disobedience, including Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929-1968) in the United States and Mohandas Gandhi (1869-1948), who led the nonviolent protests that eventually won India independence from Great Britain, both of whom cited Thoreau.
But Thoreau's arguments are complex and many who may agree with some of what he might say would reject other aspects of his essay. In the essay he begins by arguing:
/ heartily accept the motto, "That government is best which governs least"; and I should like to see it acted up to more rapidly and systematically. Carried out, it finally amounts to this, which also I believe—"That government is best which governs not at all"; and when men are prepared for it, that will be the kind of government which they will have. Government is at best but an expedient; but most governments are usually, and all governments are sometimes, inexpedient. The objections which have been brought against a standing army, and they are many and weighty, and deserve to prevail, may also at last be brought against a standing government.
He then moves on to his specific critique of the war with Mexico and his appeal for resistance:
How does it become a man to behave toward the American government today? I answer, that he cannot without disgrace be associated with it. I cannot for an instant recognize that political organization as my government which is the slave's government also.... Under a government which imprisons unjustly, the true place for a just man is also a prison. The proper place today, the only place which Massachusetts has provided for her freer and less despondent spirits, is in her prisons, to be put out and locked out of the State by her own act, as they have already put themselves out by their principles.
It is there that the fugitive slave, and the Mexican prisoner on parole, and the Indian come to plead the wrongs of his race should find them; on that separate but more
^^aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaam
free and honorable ground, where the State places those who are not with her, but against her—the only house in a slave State in which a free man can abide with honor.
Finally, he says he is not willing to be like "the thousands who are in opinion opposed to slavery and to the war, who yet in effect do nothing."Thoreau refused to pay taxes to support the war and was jailed for his crime of conscience.
While Thoreau's words and actions were widely praised by some and condemned by others, the arguments also involved significant internal differences:
•	Some who agreed with Thoreau in his opposition to the war were not willing to risk jail as he was and did not think it was necessary to do so or indeed proper to break the law as he did.
•	Some who agreed with Thoreau in his opposition to the war also disagreed with his critique of all government and would never echo Thoreau's words, "The objections which have been brought against a standing army, and they are many and weighty, and deserve to prevail, may also at last be brought against a standing government." Indeed, many have criticized Thoreau for being a philosopher of excessive individualism-advocating the moral worth of the individual over the state or a social group—a stance that observers from Tocqueville to the present have criticized the United States for representing.
Source: Henry David Thoreau, On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1893).
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
How would you explain Thoreau's decision to use a fugitive slave, a Mexican prisoner, and an Indian as examples of those wronged by his government? What connections might he make between the plight of all three? What was happening in the United States that might lead an author to link these different groups of people in 1849?
2.	Chronological Reasoning
What are the implications of his rejection of all government when he says, "That government is best which governs not at all." Is it necessary to agree with Thoreau in his rejection of government to agree with his critique of the War with Mexico or his decision to go to jail as a matter of conscience rather than pay taxes to support the war?
September 1846, Taylor defeated another larger Mexican force and captured the crucial Mexican town of Monterrey. With both armies now exhausted, Taylor allowed the Mexicans to withdraw peacefully and declared a truce, which infuriated Polk.
After the victory at Monterrey, Polk tried to open peace negotiations, but the Mexican government was not interested. This lack of interest came as a surprise
because the United States had secretly helped the former Mexican dictator Santa Anna
316 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
11.1
11.2
113
MAP 11-4 Battles in the U.S. War with Mexico. Once war was declared between the United States and Mexico, General Taylor led his armies into the disputed territory and further south to battles in Monterrey and Buena Vista in Northern Mexico, while General Kearney led forces across the continent to take control of Santa Fe, New Mexico, and then parts of California. The Navy played a major role in the takeover of California but also blockaded Pacific and Gulf ports in Mexico while General Winfield Scott landed at Veracruz and soon thereafter won control of Mexico City itself.
seize power in Mexico City, based on his promise to U.S. negotiators that he would
conclude a peace treaty. But once in office, Santa Anna shifted his position and pre-
pared to fight rather than bargain (see Map 11-4).
Santa Anna marched north to engage Taylor, whom he knew was now short of troops.
In February 1847, the two armies met at what Americans called the Battle of Buena Vista.
It was the largest single engagement of the war, and it was a draw, which meant that Santa
Anna had failed to defeat the Americans on Mexican soil. Taylor’s army remained intact.
Many of Taylor’s best troops had been moved further south. As Polk realized he
was in for a long fight, he also knew that Taylor could not march across the deserts to
Mexico City. The distance was too long to supply an invading army. Polk also worried
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation
317
11.2
E3
Explore the War with Mexico on WHAT DID THE TEXAS REVOLUTION AND MEXICAN-AMERICAN WAR MEAN FOR AMERICAN EXPANSION?
In the 1830s, the Mexican government faced problems in its northern state of Texas. The area was home to many Anglo-American settlers, and they were growing increasingly unhappy under Mexican governance. Texans successfully rebelled, forming the independent Republic of Texas in 1836. During the next decade, the United States annexed Texas as a new state, but disputed land claims quickly led to war between the United States and Mexico in 1846.
The U.S. victory over the Mexican forces in 1848, after a series of consecutive U.S. battle successes, led to huge territorial losses for its southern neighbor as the United States acquired the territory that today is the modern Southwest.
U.S.
General Winfield Scott led his troops into Mexico City to accept the official Mexican surrender in 1847. This popular picture shows the clean ending of the war but not the bloody battles that led to it. MAJOR BATTLES OF THE MEXICAN-AMERICAN WAR
Battle	Date	Victor	J
Battle of Palo Alto	j	May 8,1846	U.S.
Battle of Resaca de la Palma i	May 9,1846	U.S.
I
Battle of Monterrey I Sept. 21-24,1846 U.S. Battleof San Pasqual	Dec. 6,1846	Mexico
Battle of Rio San Gabriel	Jan. 8,1847	U.S.
i Battleof Buena Vista	Feb. 22-23,1847	U.S.
Battle of Sacramento Rier	Feb. 27,1847	U.S.
Battle of Veracruz	March 29,1847	U.S.
Battle of Cerro Gordo	April 18,1847	! U.S.
KEY QUESTIONS
Use MyHistoryLab£xp/orer to answer these questions: Context ►►► What was the political situation in Mexico leading up to its war with the United States?
Map the nation's transformations between the 1820s and 1840s.
Response ►►► How did the Texas Revolution unfold?
Understand the progress, troop movements, and major battles.
Consequence ►►► What did the acquisition of Mexican territory mean for the slavery in the United States?
Consider the potential implications for the extension of slavery.
318 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
about making Taylor a war hero and political rival. So he turned to the experienced professional soldier Winfield Scott to plan an invasion of the Mexican heartland.
In March 1847, after careful planning, Scott landed troops at the port of Veracruz.
(It was the largest amphibious operation of U.S. troops before D-Day during World War II.) Scott s army then marched to Mexico City, taking the same invasion route that Hernan Cortes had used against the Aztecs 328 years before (see Chapter 2). After hard fighting, Mexico City surrendered in September 1847. Polk, still worried about military heroes, then removed Scott from command in early 1848. The United States had lost 12,518 soldiers and spent almost $100 million in the war. Mexico had lost many more lives soldiers and civilians—and its economy was devastated.
From New Mexico to Alta California and the Bear Flag Revolt
While the major focus of the fighting in the U.S. war with Mexico took place on the Texas border and in the heartland of Mexico, New Mexico and California were not exempt from battles, though they were of smaller scale than anything seen elsewhere. The initial U.S. conquest of New Mexico was easy. In the summer of 1846, General Stephen Watts Kearny marched 850 miles from Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, to Santa Fe. The Mexican governor had already fled, and Kearny took silence and sullenness among the people for support or at least acceptance of the American takeover. He raised the U.S. flag in Santa Fe and promised that the government would respect the residents’ property and religious freedom as well as protect them from Indian raids. Kearny appointed Charles Bent, an American already living in Taos, as territorial governor. Then in September 1846, a month after he had arrived, Kearny marched most of his troops off to secure the US. victory in California. Although a bloody rebellion against U.S. rule by Hispanics and Indians broke out later that year, and Bent himself was killed by the rebels, U.S. troops soon suppressed it, and most armed resistance to annexation ended.
Emboldened by this show of support, a group of armed American immigrants in the inland town of Sonoma arrested General Mariano Vallejo, the man they considered the symbol of Mexican authority in Sonoma, and jailed him at Fort Sutter near Sacramento. Vallejo had retired from active duty with the Mexican government and was quite friendly to a possible American takeover. But to the Americans, Vallejo symbolized Mexican authority. With no other Mexican leader in sight, the rebels organized what they called the Bear Flag Revolt by declaring California to be an independent Republic. They also designed a flag and raised it in the town square in Sonoma. The flag displayed a large star next to a grizzly bear atop a bottom border stripe and the words “California Republic.” To the Mexicans like Vallejo, the Bear Flag was a symbol that these new immigrants were the bears who came as a thief to take their cattle and their land. Soon after Vallejo’s arrest, Sloat’s U.S. Navy squadron sailed into Monterey Bay and proclaimed U.S. conquest of California as a victory in the War with Mexico. The independent California Republic was a short-lived convenience. The rebels replaced the Bear Flag (now the state flag of California) with the Stars and Stripes.
The American conquest of California was much easier than the war along the Rio Grande in Texas. The Mexican government was much less interested in California than in Texas, a reality that had allowed a unique Californian culture to develop in the early decades of the 19th century. Mexican citizens of California, the products of this culture, had a decidedly ambivalent attitude toward annexation by the United States. Nevertheless, some native Californians opposed the American takeover and fought against the Bear Flag rebels and the American forces led by Navy Commodore Robert Stockton, who had replaced Sloat, and Captain Fremont. Those Californians saw themselves as citizens of the Republic of Mexico, even if sometimes disgruntled citizens, and they saw the Americans as an invading army. In a series of skirmishes between 1846 and 1847 35 of those fighting on the American side died in battle while an estimated eight Californios (those fighting for the Mexican cause) were killed. Later, the Californios suffered much greater losses in property and, indeed, their way of life.
Chapter 11
111
11.2
113
Bear Flag Revolt
A revolt led by recent American immigrants who temporarily declared California to be an independent Republic until U.S. forces took control of the territory.
Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 319
Ill I I
n.2
i
There were many reasons for the limited nature of the warfare in California. The total non-Indian population of California was very small, and most of the regular Mexican forces had abandoned the region before hostilities began. Probably even more significant, most of the Mexican leaders in California were really hoping for an American takeover to replace the distant and inept Mexican administration and the lawlessness of the American Bear Flag frontiersmen. In 1847, the final skirmishes between Californio defenders under Andres Pico and the American troops took place in southern California. As it became increasingly clear that no support could be expected from Mexico, Pico negotiated the terms of what he saw as an honorable surrender. In January 1847, Pico’s troops marched into Los Angeles and disbanded. The American control of the region was complete.
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
The treaty, signed in 1848, ended the U.S. War with Mexico and granted the United States control of all of Texas, New Mexico, and California.
Gadsden Purchase
The final acquisition of land in the continental United States was completed in 1853 when the United States paid Mexico $ 10 million for a strip of land in what is now southern New Mexico and Arizona.
Negotiating the Peace, Defining the Borders
In April 1847, Polk had sent Nicholas Trist, an experienced diplomat, to accompany Scott and negotiate a treaty with the Mexican government. After the fighting in Mexico City had ended, Trist began serious negotiations. With Mexico City, New Mexico, and California already in the hands of the U.S. Army, however, Polk decided that Trist was not being tough enough and recalled him. Instead of returning to Washington, Trist warned the Mexican authorities that he had been recalled and that his replacement would demand much more. Perhaps they might want to conclude a treaty quickly with him. The Mexicans were anxious to end the U.S. occupation of Mexico City and the country’s key ports, and Trist was right: after the conquest of Mexico City, Polk wanted even more Mexican territory. On February 2, 1848, Trist and the Mexican commissioners signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Trist told his wife that he had asked Mexico for the minimum that Polk would accept because he was ashamed of “the iniquity of the war, as an abuse of power on our part.” But his minimum included all of Polks original demands-all of Texas to the Rio Grande and land further west to California as far south as San Diego. Mexico was paid $15 million, which went to its creditors. The treaty may have been for less land than Polk wanted, but it reshaped both the United States and Mexico.
A furious President Polk, realizing that he was stuck with the treaty that Trist had negotiated, submitted it to the Senate, which ratified it. But Polk refused to pay Trist for his services. (Trist was not paid until 1871.) The Whig-affiliated editor Horace Greeley wrote in his New York Tribune, “Let us have peace, no matter if the adjuncts are revolting.” The abolitionist Frederick Douglass was harsher: “They have succeeded in robbing Mexico of her territory, and are rejoicing over their success under the hypocritical pretense of a regard for peace.” Nevertheless, with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, peace had come. The United States was much larger as a result of the war, now including 90,000 new citizens who had been citizens of Mexico and even more Indians who preferred to stay independent of both countries. It was a different country from when Polk took office.
In 1853, one of Polk’s successors, President Franklin Pierce, sent James Gadsden to Mexico City with instructions to buy a strip of land south of Arizona and New Mexico for a southern transcontinental railroad from New Orleans to El Paso to Los Angeles, which needed to be located south of the Rocky Mountains. Gadsden was also told to purchase as much additional land as possible, including perhaps all of Baja California. Mexican authorities suspected that the United States was after much more than a railroad route. In the end, Mexico sold only the minimum that the United States wanted. For $10 million, money its government badly needed, Mexico ceded 39,000 sparsely populated square miles to the United States. This area, known as the Gadsden Purchase, was the final extension of U.S. territory within what would be the contiguous 48 states (see Map 11-5).
In his own eyes, Polk had an amazingly successful term. He had made the United States a continental nation. He had completed the job he had promised to do and did not seek a second term. For the election of 1848, Polk’s Democrats nominated Lewis
320 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Territorial expansion in the nineteenth century Date of terntor'Ht acquisition, i e . 1850 Date of statehood ie WM a Original thirteen states 1783 □ Great Britain Cession 1783
Louisiana Purchase 1803
Florida Purchase 1819
L.-un Texas Annexation 1845 [... ...I Mexican Cession 1848
Acquired from Great Britainl818 I _J Acquired from Great Britain 1842 EZZ3 Oregon Country 1846	Gadsen Purchase 1853
MAP 11-5 An Expanded Union. With the treaty setting the Oregon border in 1846 and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, the territory of the continental United States was almost set. The small Gadsden Purchase in 1853 made it easier to build a railroad south of the Rocky Mountains.
Cass of Michigan. The Whigs, having won once with a general and having lost three
limes „,h then hero Henry Clay, turned to a new war hero and nominated Genera
Zachary, Taylor, known as "Old Rough and Ready,” and former Congressman Millard
Fillmore from New York as Taylor’s running mate. While Taydor was as strong a , eiovroIrnlHer and Cass, like Polk, was an expan-
nationahst as Jackson, he was also a slaveno	,
,i„ ■. m ,	,i km cbvprv could not stomach either of them and some
siomst. Northerners opposed to slavery couiu
treated the Free Soil Party, which was committed to ensunng that all new terr.torre
would be free of slavery, fhe Free Soilers did not propose abolishing slavery where r.
already existed but did oppose any extension of slavery into any new terrrtor.es. Using
that platform, they nominated former P	ironic Qutcome for President
three-way race, Taylor won a solid vie y .	ciaUy On the issue of the
Polk. The Whigs had opposed Polk	creating military heroes throughout the
ar with Mexico, and the presi en	tg on
war. In the end, a Whig war hero succeeded him. A lime o y
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 321

a hot July 4th of 1850, Taylor suddenly died and Vice President Fillmore ascended to the presidency. This time, however, unlike Tyler s accession with the death of Harrison, there were no major policy shifts when Fillmore took office.
11.2
Quick Review Considering U.S. actions in Texas and California, was the Mexican-American War a "land grab"? Why or why not?
113
California Gold Rush
The rush to find gold that brought thousands of new residents to California and produced millions of dollars in new wealth for the region and the United States.
WEST INTO THE PACIFIC_______________________________________________________
Describe the causes and outcomes of U.S. expansion in California and into the Pacific region, including establishing new relationships with Hawaii, China, and Japan.
Early in his term of office, President Polk had told Congress that he was interested in acquiring Californias harbors from Mexico because, he said, these ports would shelter American ships and allow the Pacific Ocean to provide the basis for “an extensive and profitable commerce with China, and other countries of the East.” He had no idea how quickly his dream would come true. Even before the negotiations with Mexico were complete, gold was discovered in California, and the resulting Gold Rush made into thriving commercial centers not only the gold camps but also the cities around harbors that Polk wanted. These same Pacific coast harbors quickly became home to American ships that had been dominating much of the Pacific Ocean for a decade before Polk spoke. In the 1840s, American whaling ships led all other nations in the whale trade in the Pacific, and the U.S. Navy led the way to American negotiations for a role in trade with Hawaii and China. After the acquisition of California, the Navy also established a trading relationship with Japan. After 1848, the profits of the Pacific trade poured into the United States through the newly acquired Pacific ports. The acquisition of Oregon and California not only expanded the United States to the Pacific coast but also allowed the nation to become a dominant player all across the Pacific Ocean.
The Gold Rush to California
Another 1848 development was perhaps even more important to Californias history than the shift in political authority from Mexico to the United States. On January 24, 1848, while American and Mexican negotiators were still meeting in the Mexican town of Guadalupe Hidalgo, James Marshall, a carpenter at the fort and mill owned by Swiss native Johann Sutter on the American River in northern California, was deepening the channel going into the mill’s water wheel when he noticed some odd material in the water. He reported, “Boys, I believe I have found a gold mine.” His was the first discovery of gold that would quickly lead to the California Gold Rush.
Sutter and Marshall tried to keep the discovery a secret, but word spread all too quickly. By May 1848, everyone in San Francisco seemed to know that gold had been discovered. And while communications were still slow, prospective miners from all over California—Indians, long time Mexican residents, and American settlers--as well as immigrants from Oregon, Hawaii, Mexico, and as far away as Chile, Peru, Australia, France, and parts of China moved into the gold fields of the Sierra Nevada mountains. The rush was on. Two-thirds of the white men in Oregon came south to California. Recently discharged soldiers from the Mexican and American armies joined them there. In the earliest days, California Indians who knew the land best made excellent gold prospectors. Newcomers expressed surprise that in the first year of the gold rush Miwok Indian women panned for gold alongside of Miwok men and the newcomers from around the globe. The diversity in the fields did not last.
In August 1848, an article in the New York Herald included a brief mention that gold, worth in value $30, was picked up in the bed of a stream of the Sacramento. President Polk, determined to show the value of the newly acquired territory,
322 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
113
included a mention in l,,s Annual Message to Congress. Ten million dollars in gold produced in California in 1848, and within 3 years, the revenue had grown to
S22O million. So much gold changed the economic calculations of the United States and much of the world from China to South America to Europe. Suddenly, there was a great deal of gold in circulation everywhere.
Thousands of people wanted to get rich quickly by coming to California to find the gold. California’s non-Indian population was around 7,000 in 1845. It had grown to almost 93,000 in the first U.S. census of 1850. While the first prospectors had come from the south—Mexico and South America—and the east—from Pacific whaling ships, Hawaii, and China by 1849, the largest numbers were coming from the eastern United States and Europe. Getting to California from other parts of the United States or Europe could mean a long, slow, and expensive trip by ocean around the southern tip of South America. It could also involve a shorter sea voyage to Nicaragua, then an overland trek by pack mule across the isthmus, and another voyage from there up to San Francisco. Still for others, it could mean traveling overland by walking and on ox-drawn wagons across the continent. Sea travel around South America was certainly the most comfortable and perhaps safest, but it cost a lot, from $300 to $700, and it was slow, taking 4 to 8 months. The trip via Nicaragua or Panama was almost as expensive, perhaps $600, and dangerous, but it was certainly the fastest, taking 5 to 8 weeks. Coming by land across the continent was by far the cheapest, costing not more than $200, but it also took at least 3 months and had to be timed just right to avoid winter on the Rocky Mountains. The majority opted for the cheapest way. Small numbers of people had been coming west for decades, but in 1849-50, many thousands of prospective Californians traveled along the Platte and Humboldt Rivers and then the Oregon and California Trails into the gold fields (see Map 11-3).
The gold camps themselves were harsh places. Fortunes were made and lost not only in the fields but also at gambling tables and through theft and intimidation. White Americans, some of them very recent Americans, resented the competition of miners from South America and elsewhere, especially those who came from China or who were Indians or Californios. Within a short time, most Chinese and Indians miners had been driven from the gold fields through violence and intimidation, though some Indians were retained to work for subsistence wages mining gold for others while the Chinese found other kinds of work, eventually building the western railroads and developing service industries for miners and others.
The incredible jump in California’s immigrant population came at a terrible cost for the California Indians. Their population, already declining in the face of the missions, declined much more rapidly after the beginnings of the Gold Rush because of disease and outright murder, decreasing by almost 85 percent between 1848 and 1880 to 23,000. African slaves were rare both because slave owners knew it was all too easy for a slave to escape in California and because other miners hated all competition.
Few women were able to succeed as miners; indeed, far fewer women than men even came to California in the gold rush. Mining camps were overwhelmingly male communities. Some women who did come to California were forced or tricked into prostitution to pay for their passage from Europe, China, and Latin America.
The most freewheeling era of the gold camps was very short lived. By 1851, the chances of finding gold by simply looking in a stream bed, as Marshall and Sutter had done in 1848, or even finding gold with a pan had pretty much ended except in the more southerly Tuolumne and Merced gold regions. Some miners began using a “rocker” or “cradle” that washed dirt out more quickly. Soon enough gold mining was transformed into large-scale hydraulic mining which required large corporate investments and reduced most miners to hired labor. Even for hired laborers, though mining paid much better than most East Coast jobs, the possibility of making
r	,	,,	■	z-nntimied and fortunes were still made in the gold
a fortune evaporated. Gold mining continued ano ioi iu	&
fields, but the Gold Rush was over.
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 323
11.3
Whaling in the Pacific Ocean
In February 1849, the owners of the whaling ship Minerva from New Bedford, Massachusetts, received a letter from its captain. The communication reported that, after hunting whales in the Pacific, he had stopped in San Francisco for supplies and to recruit more sailors, “but the excitement there in relation to the discovery of gold made it impossible to prevent the crew from running away. Three of the crew in attempting to swim ashore were drowned, and the ship’s company soon became too much reduced to continue the whaling voyage.” The Minerva thus joined dozens of other whaling ships abandoned in San Francisco harbor while their crews sought wealth in the California gold fields.
Some sailors no doubt found fortunes in the gold fields that had eluded them at sea, and some ship owners lost substantial sums when their ships were abandoned, but in general, the whaling industry was a source of wealth to some Americans while supporting many others and contributing to the growth of the American economy. The golden age of the American whaling industry began after the War of 1812 and continued until the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861. During these years, hundreds of American ships moved from their earlier and safer whale hunts in the Atlantic to 2-, 3-, and 4-year voyages to the Pacific Ocean. Whale oil, which burned brighter than any other fuel available at the time, was used for lamps across the globe. Whale products provided oil for the industrial revolution as well as the bone for the hoop dresses and corsets that were the height of women’s fashion. Despite British efforts to launch their own whaling fleets, by the 1830s four-fifths of all the whaling ships in the world were American.
The owners and captains of most American whaling ships were mostly men of old New England English stock, many of them Quakers, but there were exceptions. A few African-Americans, including Paul Cuffee and Absalom F. Boston, became captains,
Clipper ships like the famous Flying Cloud made the trip from New York to San Francisco in record speed-89 days in one case—while slower whaling ships traveling from New Bedford and other Atlantic ports into the Pacific often took 2 or 3 years. During the 1830s and 1840s, American sailing ships projected American influence into the Pacific Ocean region as never before.
324 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
and Cuffee became a ship owner. The crews, white and black, came from almost every corner of the globe-Pacific Islanders, West Indians, South Americans, or Portuguese. Whaling was one of the few occupations in which blacks were paid the same as whites. Even a runaway slave could admit, as John Thompson did in 1840, “I am a fugitive slave from Maryland....1 thought I would go on a whaling voyage, as being a place where I stood least chance of being arrested by slave hunters.” By some estimates, 10 percent of those who worked on whaling ships were black. Nevertheless, most sailors in the whaling business were white men, like Ishmael, the fictional narrator of Herman Melville s 1851 novel Moby-Dick, though like the fictional Ishmael, the real-world whites served as part of racially diverse crews.
Few women served on whaling ships. There were occasional stories of women who hid their gender and embarked with the crew, not easy in the close quarters of a small ship on a long voyage. Some captains also took along their wives and children, and some crew members said they appreciated having a woman on board who might know more medicine than the men and who could soothe an angry captain.
Whaling ships also explored parts of the world unknown to previous generations of Americans. The first Americans to enter Japan were whaling sailors. Almost a decade before Commodore Perry’s famous voyage to “open up” Japan in 1853-54, the Manhattan entered Tokyo harbor in 1845 to return shipwrecked Japanese sailors. The Superior was the first whaling ship to enter the Arctic Ocean off the coast of Alaska in 1848. U.S. whaling ships explored much of the South Pacific, sailed off the coast of Australia, and explored Antarctica. As a result of the many whaling ships that anchored there, Honolulu and San Francisco became major American ports, rivaling New Bedford, Boston, and Nantucket.
The Navy and Diplomacy Across the Pacific
While many American whaling ships had been sailing the Pacific since 1815, the 1848
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo added a string of Pacific ports, especially San Francisco,
to the United States. Indeed, the push for Pacific Ocean ports had been part of the
driving force behind President Polk’s push for war. The acquisition of those ports
expanded U.S. interest in the Pacific and beyond. By 1851, Daniel Webster, who had
become secretary of state again under President Fillmore, proclaimed that the United
States should “command the oceans, both oceans, all the oceans.
Central to the “command” of the Pacific Ocean was securing U.S. influence in Hawaii. In 1778, the British explorer Captain James Cook was the first European to reach the Hawaiian Islands, but by the mid-19th century, the United States had a much larger presence in Hawaii. Many Protestant missionaries and merchants began arriving in Hawaii in the 1820s where they built churches, schools, and businesses. Missionaries, merchants, and whalers boosted the Hawaiian economy, but they also brought alcohol, gambling, prostitution, and disease, including venereal diseases that killed many Hawaiians and reduced the islanders’ ability to maintain their independence.
On occasion, the United States did protect the native Hawaiians. An American missionary, William Richards, advised King Kamehameha II (r. 1819-1824) on ways to maneuver among the great powers and play the United States, Britain, and France against each other. In 1842, Secretary of State Daniel Webster added Hawaii to the protections of the Monroe Doctrine and made it clear that the United States would not tolerate a British or French takeover. In 1851, Webster negotiated a secret treaty with King Kamehameha III that, in the event of war, Hawaii would become a U.S. protectorate Webster’s priority was securing trading rights and the use of Honolulu as a coaling station for U.S. steamships-merchant vessels and warships-on their way to trade with China and Japan.
Just as the United States gained San Francisco and influence in Hawaii, Britain was forcing China to open to the West. China saw itself as the center of the world.
Foreigners were barbarians who might be allowed to trade in a limited way through
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 325
A
Japanese artist captured a U.S. Navy commanded by Commodore Mathew Perry landing in Tokyo and demanding that Japan open itself to trade with the United States. Kanagawa Treaty
An 1854 agreement-the first between the United States and Japan-it opened two Japanese ports to American commerce, protected shipwrecked American sailors, and ended Japan's 200 years of isolation.
the port of Guangzhou but would never be treated as equals. Despite the restrictions, American merchants wanted access to more trade with China, and American missionaries wanted access to its people. Regardless, both were mostly shut out. Losing patience with the Chinese, the British turned to violence. In the so-called Opium War (1839-1842), the British forced China to open its ports to British products, including opium from British India, and cede Hong Kong Island as a British colony. Following in the footsteps of the British, U.S. Ambassador Caleb Cushing negotiated the Treaty of Wang-hsia in 1844, which gained the United States the same trade rights as the British.
While Britain took the lead in China, the United States forced the even more isolated Empire of Japan to open to the West. The United States wanted Japan as another coaling station beyond Hawaii on the route to China and wanted to trade with Japan for its own sake. President Fillmore sent Commodore Mathew Perry to “open up” Japan and force a “weak and semi-barbarous people” to deal with the United States. In July 1853, Perry led four large warships with nearly 1,000 sailors into Tokyo Bay and began negotiations. He returned in March 1854 with an even larger fleet. Perry did everything he could to impress the Japanese, providing Japanese officials with champagne, Kentucky bourbon, and a history of the war with Mexico to let them know what happened to those who opposed United States might. In return, the Japanese grudgingly agreed to the Kanagawa Treaty that opened two relatively iso-lated ports to the United States. Only in 1858 did Japan open more ports and establish formal diplomatic relations with other countries. Britain quickly became a larger economic and military force in Japan than the United States. Nevertheless, the United States had established a solid presence in Japan and China by the late 1850s.
As a result of expansion in the 1840s, the nation’s border was extended to the Pacific, and U.S. ships sailed everywhere on that ocean. The Pacific and every nation on its shores including China, Japan, and Russian Siberia were in much closer contact with the United States than they had been a short time before. After 1848, the United States was an emerging force in the world.
113
Quick Review Was expansion to other nations (Hawaii, China, Japan) a logical extension of Manifest Destiny? How were U.S. intentions across the Pacific different than U.S. goals in North America?
326
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
CONCLUSION
From the late 1830s through the 1840s, the United States became a continental power whose territory spanned from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans. A strong belief in the Manifest Destiny of the United States justified the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 (though the term was not yet in use) and supported hoped-for territory acquisitions from Oregon to Texas to California. Manifest Destiny reflected the larger belief that the United States was specially chosen by divine will to bring liberty and democracy— usually in its Jacksonian form—to the planet.
While Americans discussed Manifest Destiny, the nation experienced hard times in the 1830s. The financial Panic of 1837, brought on by a worldwide glut in trade, created economic uncertainty in the cotton-growing South and the industrial North. It took several years for the nation’s economy to recover.
Many Americans supported versions of Manifest Destiny for varied political or economic reasons, while others had grave reservations. Whether one supported or opposed slavery played directly into views about expansion, which new territories one wanted, and how new territories would be used. Military actions that leaders took in the name of Manifest Destiny led to territorial expansion that spanned the continent to the Pacific coast.
During the presidency of James Polk, Texas entered the Union as a slave state, and after a bloody war from 1846 to 1848, Mexico ceded much of what became the American West to the United States, including New Mexico and—aided by the local Bear Flag Revolt—California. While many Americans, from politicians like John Quincy Adams to philosophers like Henry David Thoreau, opposed the War with Mexico, many other Americans celebrated the victory and the acquisition of so much new territory. The United States also ended the joint ownership of the Oregon Territory with Britain, and both countries resolved borders that allowed each country to have full control of its share. The Gold Rush accelerated the settlement of California with diverse people, and it produced enormous amounts of gold but decimated the American Indian population in the far west.
Winning California from Mexico dramatically changed the U.S. economy not only in terms of gold but also in terms of increased ventures throughout the Pacific involving whaling and trade. The United States now projected Manifest Destiny across an ocean where it had few rivals. The United States became the world leader in the production of whale oil, established a relationship with Hawaii, increased its trade with China, and forced Japan to open itself up to the West. The intensification of American interest in Asia in the 1840s and 1850s reflected the desire of American policy makers to successfully compete with Europe for new markets and coincided with the realization of the long-standing desire among many Americans to create a continental nation that could become a world power.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did U.S. reliance on the idea of Manifest Destiny permanently alter the geographical, social, and political complexion of the United States?
Chapter 11 Manifest Destiny: Expanding the Nation 327
Chapter 11 Chapter Review
MANIFEST DESTINY—THE IMPORTANCE OF AN IDEA
Explain what Manifest Destiny meant and how it led the United States to involvement in Texas, California, and Oregon.
Review Questions
1.	Crafting Arguments
Was the war that broke out in 1835 between the Mexican government and American settlers in Texas inevitable? Why or why not?
2.	Contextualization
Why was the status of Texas such a divisive political issue in the early 1840s?
3.	Historical Interpretation
What light do the letters of Narcissa Whitman (see the American Voice feature on page 312) shed on the motives behind American settlement in the Oregon Territory in the 1830s?
11.1
5.	Contextualization
What connections did opponents of the U.S. War with Mexico make between the war and slavery?
6.	Historical Interpretation
What changes did incorporation into the United States bring to the society and economy of the former Mexican provinces of New Mexico and California?
WEST INTO THE PACIFIC________________________________
Analyze the causes and outcomes of U.S. expansion into the Pacific region, including establishing new relationships with Hawaii, China, and Japan.
Review Questions
7.	Historical Interpretation
What role did the whaling industry play in American expansion in the Pacific in the first half of the 19th century?
8.	Crafting Arguments
How would you explain the intensification of American interest in Asia in the 1840s and 1850s?
I
11J
THE U.S. WAR WITH MEXICO,
1846-1848 1M
Analyze the causes, strategies, and outcomes of the U.S. War with Mexico.
Review Questions
4.	Crafting Arguments
Is it fair to describe the U.S. War with Mexico as a war of conquest? Why or why not?
328 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
Expansion, Separation, and a New Union
1844-1877
PART
PART OUTLINE
