Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order
Gilded Age
Term applied to America in the late 1800s that refers to the shallow display and worship of wealth characteristic of the period.
TABLE 17-1 Factory Sales of Passenger Cars per Year
Year	Numbers of Vehicles Sold
1900	j	4,100
1905	24,200
1910	181,100
1915	895,000
1920	1,905,500
I
J
While Ford, Walter Chrysler, and the founders of General Motors were creating the automobile industry in Detroit, Michigan, other inventors were tinkering with additional ways to advance transportation. Wilbur and Orville Wright, two bicycle makers from Dayton, Ohio, were determined to develop a flying machine. On December 17,1903, on a deserted beach at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, their machine took off. By 1908, Orville Wright had a contract with the Army Signal Corps to conduct test flights at Fort Myer, Virginia. The Wright brothers conducted test flights around the country, including Los Angeles and Chicago. Air travel did not transform the lives of most Americans as quickly as the automobile because it remained inefficient and dangerous for some time. Nevertheless, watching people actually leave the ground on machines confirmed for many that, in the realm of technology, anything was possible.
17.1
Quick Review How did the inventions of the late 1800s and early 1900s better connect the nation?
CORPORATIONS AND MONOPOLIES
Analyze the role of the new giant corporations in American life.
The kinds of inventions that were appearing in the 1880s and 1890s, like the earlier railroads and telegraph systems, could not be produced by a family business. Railroads crossed the continent. Electric generation required huge investments. Telephones were useful primarily if they connected large numbers of people. Most of the country’s earliest corporations had been for public benefit—building universities and hospitals—or for temporary partnerships for specific ventures. New corporate structures emerged during the Jacksonian era in response to larger, more expensive ventures to process cotton and manufacture other materials. After the Civil War, those corporate structures achieved a level of size and power undreamed of by earlier generations of manufacturers. Managing the investments involved in the great new industries also required a new kind of financing. In the absence of a federal bank—nothing had replaced the Bank of the United States that Jackson had abolished in the 1830s (see Chapter 10)-private bankers played an increasingly important role. Post-Civil War corporations and banks were of a size and a level of power the nation had not seen before. They made a few Americans extremely wealthy—richer than any American ever had been before—and they made other Americans very nervous about the new concentrations of wealth and the accompanying power. The outsized wealth of the era, sometimes lavishly spent, inspired the humorist Mark Twain to name this post-Civil War era the “Gilded Age,” a reference to coating items with gold. For some, the Gilded Age produced an excess of money, taste, and power; for others, it created poverty.
482 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Financing and Controlling the Railroads—Jay Cooke, Cornelius Vanderbilt, and Others
At the end of the Civil War, the most powerful banker in the United States was Jay Cooke, who saved the Union’s finances during the war (see Chapter 14). In the early 1870s, however, he almost wrecked the nations economy.
Cooke financed the Northern Pacific Railroad (see Chapter 16), telling European investors that a rail line from Duluth, Minnesota, to the Pacific coast would connect the world’s breadbasket to shipping across the Pacific and across the Atlantic. He insisted, “There is nothing on the American continent equal to it....There is no end to the possibilities of wealth here.” The promise of wealth was enticing, and investment poured in. However, there were too many railroads, and few were making profits. At the same time, the end of the seemingly faraway Franco-Prussian War (1870-1871) caused world grain prices to drop precipitously as European countries produced more of their own wheat. The result was further reduced profit on the rail lines that hauled American wheat. A government investigation into the Union Pacific Railroad’s shaky finances during this period undermined public confidence in rail investments. As a result, Cooke could neither sell new railroad bonds nor meet obligations on the old ones. On September 18, 1873, Jay Cooke and Company declared bankruptcy and closed its doors.
The news that the nation’s most prestigious banker could not meet his obligations undermined financial confidence, launching what was known as the Panic of 1873. The Nation magazine described Wall Street: “Great crowds of men rushed to and fro trying to get rid of their property, almost begging people to take it from them at any price.” The Stock Exchange closed for 10 days. Banks collapsed. Railroad construction stopped. By 1874,500,000 people had lost their jobs, and breadlines were seen not only in New York but also wherever railroad construction and the demand for steel rails, wooden ties, or products that moved by rail had been boosting the economy. The depression of 1873 demonstrated the boom-and-bust cycle of the new economy and the degree to which railroads and banking connected all parts of the nation’s financial structure.
As the economy recovered after 1873, the man who profited more than any other was already very rich Cornelius Vanderbilt. After Robert Fulton invented the steamboat in 1807, Vanderbilt created a steamboat empire, first in New York Harbor, and then around the world. After 1815, Vanderbilt’s steamers began to travel to Boston, New Orleans, and—during the California gold rush—to Nicaragua to meet other steamers that took gold seekers up the coast to California. Controlling the transit to California was far more profitable than seeking gold there. His style of doing business was illustrated on one occasion when, in an argument with competitors he said, “Gentlemen: You have undertaken to cheat me. I won’t sue you, for the law takes too long. I will ruin you.” During the Civil War, Vanderbilt kept his ships moving between New York and Union-held New Orleans and beyond to South America in spite of Confederate efforts to stop them.
After the Civil War,.Vanderbilt shifted from steamships to railroads. Vanderbilt did not build railroads; he bought them. In addition, he created new and much more profitable ways to manage them. Vanderbilt created corporations of a size not previously known in the United States and launched a managerial revolution. The corporations that Vanderbilt led involved levels of managers reporting to powerful central offices. The new bureaucracies could ensure safety: trains that ran on schedule were less likely to collide, and trains that ran on well-laid tracks were less likely to derail. They also created great new wealth even as they reduced the role of any one individual manager or boss. Vanderbilt was hardly alone in fostering either of these developments, but he was certainly an innovative leader.
In 1863, Vanderbilt bought a major interest in the New York & Harlem Railroad, a small line that ran to the heart of Manhattan. Vanderbilt improved its tracks, cars, and service and purchased the connecting Hudson River Railroad. Then in 1867, he forced
17.2
Panic of 1873
A major economic downturn, launched when the country's leading financier, Jay Cooke, went bankrupt during which thousands lost their jobs and from which the country took years to recover.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order 41
the directors of the state’s largest railroad, the New York Central, to sell to him or be shut out of New York City. His New York Central Railroad empire made Cornelius Vanderbilt the richest man in America when he died in 1877.
Others also became major speculators in the United States in the 1860s and 1870s. Daniel Drew, along with Jay Gould and Jim Fisk, came to be known as corporate pirates. They simply extracted wealth from a company. As a young man, Drew herded cattle from farms to slaughterhouses. He once claimed to have perfected a technique of feeding salt to his cattle and then, just before reaching the slaughterhouses, giving them all the water they wanted so they would arrive looking plump and, thus, fetch a good price. In later life, he certainly did the same thing with stocks: buying companies, issuing stock far beyond the company’s value—called watering the stock in honor of his experience with cattle—and then leaving the company almost bankrupt while he walked away with the profit from the stock sales.
Later, in 1869 Drew, Gould, and Fisk teamed up to corner the nation’s gold supply (see Chapter 15). First, they convinced President Grant to appoint Daniel Butterfield to the key treasury post overseeing the nation’s gold supply. They then bribed Butterfield to join in their conspiracy. As they kept buying and hoarding gold, the price kept going up and up because of the demand they were creating. Grant discovered, or at least guessed, what Butterfield and the trio were up to, and he ordered the government to sell up to $4 million in gold, bringing the price back down. The trio sold their gold just before Grant issued his order. Although they no longer controlled the gold supply, they emerged very well-off. Many others who had invested in gold were ruined, and what became known as “Black Friday” created a significant drag on the nation’s economy. Henry Adams, grandson and great-grandson of presidents, who was just beginning his own career as one of the nation’s major intellectuals, wrote:
For the first time since the creation of these enormous corporate bodies, one of them has shown its power for mischief, and has proved itself able to override and trample on law, custom, decency, and every restraint known to society, without scruple, and as yet without check.
It would be another 30 years before there were effective checks on the corporate gamblers.
The fortunes that the Vanderbilts, Drews, and others like them made in the 1870s and 1880s allowed them to spend lavishly, creating the public image of gilding a lily— a flower that when cut would be thrown away in a few days—with gold, a lot of gold. In grand parties in New York and at summer “cottages” or mansions in Newport, Rhode Island, or elsewhere, they showed off their wealth to the delight of some and the disgust of others.
New Industries: Rockefeller's Oil, Carnegie's Steel, and Morgan's Banking
Before the 1800s were over, however, a new generation of corporate leaders exceeded the most optimistic hopes of the Vanderbilts and their generation. Among them was John D. Rockefeller, who, though he did not discover any oil nor invent new ways to refine oil into kerosene or gasoline, did discover new ways to make money from oil, amassing more money from the fuel than anyone had previously imagined possible. Mark Hanna, a childhood friend who later became President McKinley’s closest advisor, remembered saying of John D. that he was “sane in every respect save one—he was money mad!”
When Rockefeller was 20 years old, he heard news that got as much national attention as John Brown’s raid on Harper’s Ferry that same year. On August 28,1859, Edwin Drake struck oil while drilling a well near Titusville, Pennsylvania. “Rock oil” as the oil that came from the ground was called (as opposed to whale oil and oil refined from coal), was in great demand. Before the invention of electric lights in 1879, kerosene lights were the brightest and most popular form of illumination. They were significantly
84 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
U ' *'
■a


■■■
*Fji
John D. Rockefeller (1839-1937) created the Standard Oil Company which came to have monopoly control of the sales of oil in the United States making Rockefeller an extraordinarily rich man as he drove competitors out of business.
brighter than candles and safer than gas lights. With kerosene lights, families could read in the evening, and the mills could start earlier and operate later. In addition, the machinery that the country was using, from railway engines to factory presses and looms, needed to be lubricated with oil to avoid seizing up. However, the oil had been scarce and expensive. Drake’s oil well significantly changed the potential supply of oil.
A rush ensued to sink oil wells in western Pennsylvania. Rockefeller, however, did not like the dirt or the risk of drilling in which some struck it rich while others with a dry well or two went bankrupt. (He also did not like the risk of fighting as a soldier and quickly paid the $300 for a substitute to fight for him in the Union army.) He focused instead on refining the oil that others produced. With two partners, Rockefeller built a refinery in Cleveland where he could take advantage of nearby supplies of crude oil and get his products to market by using Great Lakes shipping and the rail lines between the East Coast and Chicago that ran through Cleveland.
Rockefeller was determined to dominate the Cleveland refining market. He kept his products better and his prices lower than any of the competition. He quickly bought out his partners, one of whom later commented, “John had abiding faith in two things: the Baptist creed and oil.” He might have added that Rockefeller also had great faith in his own ability to strike a good bargain and manage his business, which meant cutting costs in every possible way. He brought in a new partner, Henry M. Flagler, who was as religious and as cost-conscious as himself. Rockefeller’s Cleveland refinery was soon shipping more oil than any other in the region, which gave him great influence with the railroads. Jay Gould offered a rebate to Rockefeller if he would ship on the Erie system, and Rockefeller accepted but then convinced the Erie’s primary competition, the Lake Shore Railroad, to give an even better one. When word of the secret rebates leaked out, other oil producers complained, but Rockefeller and Flagler had already made enough money to buy several of the competitors.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order^

17.2
Horizontal integration
The merger of competitors in the same industry.
In 1870, the Rockefeller-Flagler partnership became the Standard Oil Company, and the two set out to gain control of the nation’s oil business. They bargained with oil producers to keep costs low. They bought up every rival refining company they could, leaving producers with little option but to sell their oil to Standard Oil at whatever price Standard Oil was willing to pay. When a company would not sell to them, they went into direct competition, cutting prices, until the competitor either sold to Standard Oil or went out of business. They created the Standard Oil Trust, a separate corporation, to buy up virtually every other refinery in the nation. While competition kept prices low, Rockefeller thought competition was a terrible waste of effort and a drain on his profits, and he meant to end it. By the 1880s, companies under the control of Standard Oil refined nine out of 10 barrels of oil produced in the United States. This control over oil production came to be known as horizontal integration or, in cases like Standard Oil where nearly all of the industry was integrated, a horizontal monopoly. Standard Oil kept growing. Rockefeller produced his own tank cars and leased them to the railroads, making it difficult for competitors to transport oil. When pipelines started replacing oil tank cars, Standard Oil bought the pipelines. In the 1890s, tired of haggling with oil producers, Standard Oil simply started buying oil wells and became the largest producer and refiner of oil in the nation. In the 1890s, the United States had no meaningful antimonopoly laws in force, and Rockefeller’s tireless work had made him the master of oil from its production to its refining to its sales.
Just as Edison’s light bulb was starting to reduce demand for kerosene, Henry Ford’s automobiles created a demand for gasoline, refined from the same crude oil as kerosene. Automobiles would dwarf all previous markets for Standard Oil’s products. In addition, the world’s navies were also turning from sail to oil-powered steamships. After 1900, everyone knew that with the development of these gas- and oil-powered vehicles, Standard Oil’s greatest days were still ahead (see Map 17-1).
Andrew Carnegie was only a little older than Rockefeller. In 1848, when he was 12 years old, his family came to the United States from his native Scotland after his father, a successful linen weaver, was thrown out of work by the mechanization of the industry. Andrew Carnegie’s first job was in a textile mill in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, where he earned $1.20 per week. He soon moved to higher paying jobs and eventually became the personal assistant to the division superintendent of the Pennsylvania Railroad, a position in which he quickly learned the inner workings of American industry.
Like Rockefeller, Carnegie paid someone to serve as his substitute in the Union army—a practice that was entirely legal, though ethically questionable, during the Civil War. In 1863, he decided to leave salaried work because he was confident he could make more money by investing, and he valued his independence. He advised others that the key to success was “Put all your eggs in one basket and then watch that basket.” Carnegie’s basket was steel, which he quickly realized was coming to dominate American commerce.
In the early 1870s, Carnegie persuaded several investors to join him in opening a new state-of-the-art steel mill just outside Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh was near the coal fields, and steel mills used a lot of coal. The location was also near rivers and competing railroad lines, so no one rail line could squeeze Carnegie’s profits. Having established himself as the head of a giant corporation, Carnegie, like Rockefeller, set out to dominate the field. He found ways to track and cut costs. Seeing him around the plant looking at inventories, one foreman said, “There goes that damned bookkeeper.” He replaced wood buildings, which could burn, with iron ones; he developed an assembly line approach to steel production; and he constantly updated and replaced equipment.
Carnegie built or bought everything needed for the steel business, from the coal mines to the coke ovens that prepared fuel to the iron mines that produced iron ore. He purchased railroads and steamships to transport the coal and ore to Pittsburgh. In addition, he did whatever was needed to keep workers’ salaries as low as possible. He once said, “Show me your cost sheets. It is more interesting to know how well and how cheaply you have done this thing than how much money you have made.” Other steel mill owners who worried only about profits were defeated by Carnegie’s constant focus on costs.
Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
486
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World
Superior
CANADA
MAINE
Type of Plants:	'""v
A
Blast furnace 0 Rolling mill, steel work □ Bridge building plant Companies: Hi The Carnegie Co.
Hi Federal Steel Co.
HI
National Steel Co. HI
National Tube Co. _ American Steel and Wire
Co. of New Jersey □ American Tin Plate Co. Hi American Steel Hoop Co.' 6SB American Sheet Steel Co. ' IH American Bridge Co.
HI
Lake Superior Iron Mines Independent Firms: O
Blast furnace 0 Rolling mill Companies:
Republic Iron and “ Steel Co.
H
Bethlehem Steel Co. ■■■■ Lackawana Iron and
Steel Co.
Pennsylvania Steel Co. “ of New Jersey Hi Cambria Steel Co.
Crucible Steel Co. of
America
Tennessee Coal, Iron, and Railroad Company
Hi Jones and Laughlins Ltd
O. MICHIGAN I
? *♦
INDIANA!
0'®
veland«
• ♦/
i
OHIO
KENTUCKY
TENNESSEE
ALABAMA
LOUISIANA
VERMC
L
. Ontario
yiAss.'
-NEW YORK"
PENNSYLVANIA/
•t
WEST > VIRGINIA
;NJ.
o
\
W\ DELAWARE
VIRGINIA
NORTH
CAROLINA
SOUTH
CAROLINA
GEORGIA
Gulf of
Mexico
Pittsburgh
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
FLORIDA,
Lake Erie		
		
	k ' J X	
Cleveland
v.;
MAP 17-1 The Nations's Industrial Heartland. The giant corporations of the Gilded Age tended to concentrate in the northwest of the United States. The factories of the region attracted immigrants from around the world and within the United States while also concentrating wealth and increasing the country's transportation networks.
By the late 1890s, Carnegie Steel was the largest single company in the steel business. In contrast to the Standard Oil Trust, which was the model of horizontal monopoly, controlling all of the nation’s oil refining, Carnegie Steel was the model of vertical integration, controlling all means of steel production from raw materials through sales. For Carnegie, those means included the materials of coal and iron in the ground, the mining and transport of the materials, and the production and sales of the steel that came from these materials. Like Rockefeller, Carnegie became a very rich man.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Orde
Vertical integration
The consolidation of numerous production functions, from the extraction of the raw materials to the distribution and marketing of the finished products, under the directigjj of one firm.

More important than enjoying a lavish lifestyle and sometimes supporting various charities, emerging corporate leaders used their money to ensure their political influence and power. While Rockefeller and Carnegie were the best known, and probably the most successful, builders of monopoly trusts, other leaders built monopolies and grew almost as rich. In 1892, the New York World listed 3,045 millionaires in the United States. Gustavus Swift dominated meat, Charles Pillsbury grain, Henry Havemeyer sugar, Frederick Weyerhaeuser lumber, and James B. Duke tobacco. In addition, companies in other fields established trusts as they replaced competition with easier and more profitable coordination—the cottonseed oil trust, the linseed oil trust, the lead mining trust, the whiskey distilling trust, and the cord (rope) manufacturing trust. Free enterprise, as previous generations had known it, was quickly being replaced by a single corporation or trust that had many employees who simply took orders while the trust dominated the market for its product, ending competition and setting prices that consumers large and small had no choice but to pay or do without the product. The owners of these trusts had enough political power to make sure that no government intervened.
While Rockefeller and Carnegie were amassing their fortunes, another American was amassing the greatest economic power that the country had ever seen. Although never as personally wealthy as Rockefeller or Carnegie, John Pierpont Morgan was the banker that everyone else, including the richest industrialists and often the U.S. government, looked to. Like Rockefeller and Carnegie, Morgan was born in the 1830s, and like them, he paid for a substitute rather than let the Civil War divert him from banking. In the financial chaos of the Civil War, Morgan launched J.P. Morgan & Company. During the war, Morgan made great profits. He once sold reconditioned army rifles back to the federal government at a considerable profit. Working with European banks,
Morgan helped finance the transcontinental railroad in the United States and the Suez Canal in the Middle East (both of which were completed in 1869). Using his skill and formidable resources, Morgan helped pick up the pieces of the American economy after the collapse of Jay Cooke & Company had launched the Panic of 1873.
In 1877, after Cornelius Vanderbilt died, Morgan helped Vanderbilt’s son, William, sell off some shares of the New York Central Railroad. In return Morgan got a $3 million fee but, more valuable to him, a seat on the board of directors of the New York Central. He helped others with similar sales and gained seats for himself on other equally powerful boards. As a result, Morgan knew more about American industries than any other banker. In particular, he knew that the railroads were overbuilt and he was determined to reduce the competition among them.
In the late 1880s, two of the largest railroads, the New York Central and the Pennsylvania Railroad, ran competing lines from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh and from New York to Chicago. Morgan decided to be a very forceful peacemaker. He invited— or summoned—the principal directors of each railroad to his yacht, the Corsair, and then ordered the captain to sail up and down the Hudson until finally, in exhaustion, they agreed to a settlement. Ihe result of the agreement—some called it collusion—was better organization and higher profits for both lines, especially for stockholders and directors like Morgan himself, who also always collected a hefty fee for his services, but at considerable cost to shippers who had benefitted from the cutthroat competition.
The Panic of 1893 showed Morgan’s power as much as prosperity did. In May 1893, the National Cordage Company, known as the rope trust, which was producing far more rope than the market demanded and issuing far too many promissory notes, went bankrupt, launching a major drop in stock prices among related businesses. In an economy as deeply interconnected as the U.S. economy had become, a drop in one area meant a drop in many others. In the course of the ensuing depression, the Philadelphia and Reading, Northern Pacific, Union Pacific, and Santa Fe Railroads as well as a host of other businesses all followed into bankruptcy.
People much lower on the economic scale also felt the depression, sometimes more so. In the fall of 1893, a Methodist minister from Lincoln, Nebraska, told the
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
American Voices
Andrew Carnegie, Wealth, 1889
17.2
In this article, known as "The Gospel of Wealth," Carnegie ff justified his vast fortune (he would be the richest person in America by 1901) and laid the foundation for his late-in-life generosity that built Carnegie libraries and created the Carnegie Corporation of New York in 1911.
The price which society pays for the law of competition, like the price it pays for cheap comforts and luxuries, is also great; but the advantage of this law are also greater still, for it is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development, which brings improved conditions in its train....We accept and welcome therefore, as conditions to which we must accommodate ourselves, great inequality of environment, the concentration of business, industrial and commercial, in the hands of a few, and the law of competition between these, as being not only beneficial, but essential for the future progress of the race... .The question then arises.. .What is the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon which civilization is founded have thrown it into the hands of the few?...
There are but three modes in which surplus wealth can be disposed of. It can be left to the families of the decedents; or it can be bequeathed for public purposes; or, finally, it can be administered during their lives by its possessors....Why should men leave great fortunes to their children? If this is done from affection, is it not misguided affection? Observation teaches that, generally speaking, it is not well for the children that they should be so burdened. Neither is it well for the state....
As to the second mode, that of leaving wealth at death for public uses, it may be said that this is only a means for the disposal of wealth, provided a man is content to wait until he is dead before it becomes of much good in the world... .Besides this, it may fairly be said that no man is to be extolled for doing what he cannot help doing...
There remains, then, only one mode of using great fortunes... Under its sway we shall have an ideal state, in which the surplus
wealth of the few will become, in the best sense the property of the many, because administered for the common good, and this wealth, passing through the hands of the few, can be made a much more potent force for the elevation of our race than if it had been distributed in small sums to the people themselves....
This, then, is held to be the duty of the man of Wealth: First, to set an example of modest, unostentatious living, shunning display or extravagance; to provide moderately for the legitimate wants of those dependent upon him; and after doing so to consider all surplus revenues which come to him simply as trust funds, which he is called upon to administer, and strictly bound as a matter of duty to administer in the manner which, in his judgment, is best calculated to produce the most beneficial results for the community—the man of wealth thus becoming the mere agent and trustee for his poorer brethren, bringing to their service his superior wisdom, experience and ability to administer, doing for them better than they would or could do for themselves....
Such, in my opinion, is the true Gospel concerning Wealth, obedience to which is destined some day to solve the problem of the Rich and the Poor, and to bring "Peace on earth, among men of Good-Will"
Source: Andrew Carnegie, "Wealth," North American Review, Vo\. 148, No. 391 (June, 1889).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
In Carnegie's view, what importance should be attached to economic inequality? How did he believe the wealthy should use their fortunes?
2.	Crafting an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement. "Andrew Carnegie's views on wealth were nothing more than a thinly veiled effort to justify exploitation and social injustice."
story of “an honest Methodist farmer” who sold his year’s harvest for $31 and “with
this he paid his taxes and half his grocery bill, and went home without dinner because
there was not a nickel left in his pocket.” A lot of honest Methodist, Baptist, and
Presbyterian farmers were in the same boat, as well as factory workers and members
of the rising middle class who lost their jobs and their hopes in the 1893 depression.
As European investors watched the collapse of the U.S. economy, they started
withdrawing gold held in U.S. banks. The European run on the U.S. gold supply
almost bankrupted the U.S. government. At the beginning of 1895, the federal gov-
ernment’s gold supply, kept in vaults in New York City, was $100 million. By the end
of January, it was down to $50 million and falling quickly as investors withdrew their
gold. In early February, Morgan traveled from New York to Washington, DC, in his
private rail car to offer help. President Grover Cleveland, a Democrat, did not want
the political embarrassment of being rescued by—or being seen under the control
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Ordei
112
173

of—J. P. Morgan. However, by the time the two met, Morgan informed Cleveland (since Morgan always had the most up-to-date financial information) that there was but $9 million in gold still available and that a $10 million draft was on its way. The banker told the president, “You can’t meet it. It will be over before three o’clock.”
Morgan also had a solution to offer. He reminded the president and the treasury secretary of a long-forgotten piece of Civil War legislation that said, The Secretary of the Treasury may purchase coin with any of the bonds or notes of the United States, authorized by law, at such rates and upon such terms as he may deem most advantageous to the public interest.” He then offered $65 million in gold in return for 30-year government bonds. The president asked Morgan whether he could promise that the deal—which not only provided gold but put the full faith and credit of the House of Morgan behind the credit of the United States—would end the rush on the treasury and Morgan said, “Yes sir, I will guarantee it.”
The deal worked. European bankers who had lost faith in the United States had faith in Morgan. They bought the bonds and stopped demanding payments in gold. The government had been protected from going the way of National Cordage and the Reading Railroad. The publisher Joseph Pulitzer called the deal an “excellent arrangement for the bankers,” but “[f]or the nation it means a scandalous surrender of credit and a shameful waste of substance.” Morgan made a fortune on the deal but also saved the U.S. economy. In the absence of any federal bank, the House of Morgan essentially served that role until the Federal Reserve Bank was created in 1916.
No project of J.P. Morgan’s was as great, however, as the one he launched in 1900. It began with the kind of competition that Morgan always hated. Illinois Steel, which Morgan had helped finance, was making a direct run at Carnegie Steel for control of the market. Charles Schwab, one of Carnegie’s partners, organized a holiday dinner with Morgan to see whether they could work out a deal to end the competition. Carnegie had talked of retiring, and his wife was anxious for him to enjoy life and devote himself full time to his charities. Carnegie was asked his price and, after a night’s sleep, offered to sell Carnegie Steel for $480 million. Morgan agreed and later shook Carnegie’s hand saying, “Mr. Carnegie, I want to congratulate you on being the richest man in the world.” Morgan, Schwab, and Elbert Gary, the head of Illinois Steel, then negotiated with Rockefeller, whom Morgan disliked personally, to buy out Rockefeller’s ownership of iron deposits in the Mesabi Range and the ore boats that went with them. In March 1901, Morgan announced the creation of the U.S. Steel Corporation, bringing together Carnegie’s formidable assets, Illinois Steel, the Rockefeller iron mines, and other assets worth a total of $1.4 billion, the largest corporation ever seen at the time. The giant monopoly corporation was now the dominating fixture of the U.S. economy.
Quick Review How did the businessmen of the Gilded Age and their tactics revolutionize American industry? Whom do you think had the greatest impact?
LIVES OF THE MIDDLE CLASS IN THE GILDED AGE_____________________________
Analyze daily life, popular ideas, and political direction for the middle class during the Gilded Age.
173
During the Gilded Age, what came to be known as middle-class values emerged in the United States. More Americans than ever before achieved a level of comfort and social respectability that, while it was a long way from the wealth of the Rockefellers, Carnegies, and Morgans, was also a long way from the poverty of most of rural America or those who worked on the railroads or in the refineries. As Americans moved from farms to towns, some of the urban residents became comfortable professionals and managers and, in the process, created a set of norms for “middle-class respectability” that had not been known before.

Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Middle-Class Life and Expectations
John Lewis came to the United States from Great Britain before the Civil War and got a job in the wholesale grocery business in New York City By the 1870s, Lewis was the proprietor of his own store and a solid member of Americas emerging urban middle class. While achieving a middle-class life for himself and his family, Lewis wrote letters to his brother in England describing his life. For the Christmas of 1875, Lewis took the train to visit relatives in Philadelphia. In addition to the feasting, which greatly impressed Lewis, he also noted the Christmas tree decorations:
As large and fine a tree as can be accommodated being procured and set up, it is covered with every conceivable shape into which coloured and gilt paper and card can be cut and...little pictures, glass balls, chains, garlands &c, anything to make a gay and imposing display.
Lewis also noted that the enjoyment of the trees seemed to be a prime adult occupation while the children wanted candy. He noted, “The candy stores are among the gayest and most prosperous, and the consumption of their wares by women and children all the year round is enormous and is often spoken of by writers as a great national failing.”
In maintaining his own store, traveling easily from city to city, celebrating holidays with feasts, decorations, and parties, Lewis was participating in the emerging middle-class culture of the late 1800s. Before the Civil War, Christmas celebrations among American Protestants were limited affairs, but after the war, the fondness for that holiday, and the economic resources to celebrate more grandly than ever before, grew rapidly. A larger group of people had the resources to own homes, decorate them, and travel to visit relatives than in any previous generation in the United States.
Those in the rising urban middle class were redesigning not only their private homes but also their expectations, particularly for city buildings and services that supported their emerging tastes and desires. Huge new department stores offered the opportunity to shop for the things that middle-class people, like John Lewis, wanted in their lives. The architect Daniel Burnham, the leading voice of what came to be known as the City Beautiful movement, designed public buildings in a classical style that showed a permanence and beauty that this emerging class expected. City Beautiful planned major revitalization efforts in Washington, DC, Cleveland, San Francisco, and Chicago, designing buildings such as the grand new Boston Public Library, based on the model of a Renaissance palazzo; the new building for the Library of Congress, which was completed in 1897; and the new New York Stock Exchange that opened in 1903.
classical style that characterized the movement.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Or
173
The architect Louis Sullivan, Burnham’s professional rival, sought a much simpler and, he said, more American style of architecture that reflected the energy of a culture that constructed buildings soaring to heights previously unimagined. Sullivan hated classical Renaissance style and preferred more simple lines. Frederick Law Olmsted designed major new park systems, including Central Park in New York, Boston’s chain of connected parks around the city known as the Emerald Necklace, and the Mall in Washington, DC, all of which spoke to the commitment to beauty and permanence for a new and growing class of people who had the time and inclination to use such public spaces for leisure and uplifting pastimes.
While architects designed new buildings and park systems designed to show permanence and prosperity, other urban planners found ways to make cities more livable for the growing middle class or to help the middle class to escape what they found difficult to live with. These planners found new ways to bring pure water into city neighborhoods, perhaps most important to the life—and health—of city dwellers. Cholera and other waterborne diseases had long been a fact of city life. Once a cholera epidemic began to spread, wealth and class did little to protect people from it. Cities, like small towns, tended to depend on well water and on small, individual cisterns that collected rain water for their water supply. However, in growing urban areas, stagnant cisterns were a breeding ground for disease, and wells easily became contaminated. Beginning in 1842, New York started building a reservoir for water to be piped into the city from rural areas to provide a healthier water supply. As New York grew, a large new plan—the New Croton Aqueduct—was built from 1885 to 1893 to bring water to all of the city’s neighborhoods. Other cities followed the same pattern. Water, which had been a source of disease, became one of the healthiest aspects of urban life.
Even as city life improved, many in the middle class wanted to put some distance between themselves and the cities. Railroads, which had initially connected cities over long distances, began to build shorter lines that would allow people who worked in cities to live in suburbs—a new development in American life during the Gilded Age. They commuted between their homes in semirural settings and their work in the commercial centers of urban America. Cities also quickly took to adding electric lights that kept cities alive at night, electric elevators that allowed much taller buildings to be built, and electric trolleys that made it easier to get from one part of a city to another. The cities of the Gilded Age were cleaner, brighter, and faster paced than anything known in the United States before that time.
Gilded Age Religion
The Gilded Age saw new levels of religious activity among white middle-class Protestants. Most of the middle class were, indeed, both white and Protestant, and they viewed themselves as living in a “Christian America,” by which they meant a Protestant Christian culture. Between 1860 and 1900, the major Protestant denominations—the Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Episcopalians—tripled their membership from 5 million to 16 million. Americans not only joined Protestant churches but also participated in nondenominational religious organizations, including the YMCA as well as Bible, mission, and social reform societies. The theology that was being preached changed with the times, becoming more individualistic and more optimistic. And no one represented the changes in white American Protestantism as much as the great revivalist of the era, Dwight L. Moody.
Like many Americans of his generation—the same generation as Rockefeller, Carnegie, and Morgan—Moody grew up on a farm but moved to a city. When the Civil War began, Moody gave up his shoe business to work full time for the YMCA. He led a Sunday school for poor immigrant children and supported the YMCAs social service missions. By 1875, Moody had an international reputation. He launched the Northfield and Mount Hermon schools as well as a new Bible training school in Chicago in 1886 that eventually became the Moody Bible Institute.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Electric lights, electronic trolleys, and fast-moving trains not only speeded transportation but also created a new kind of energized night life in cities like New York.
W.
Louis Sonntag, Jr., The Bowery at Night, watercolor, 1895. Copyright Museum of the City of New York. 32.275.2. Another prominent minister, Lyman Abbott, described Moody’s preaching in 1899 saying, “As he stood on the platform, he looked like a business man; he dressed like a business man; he took the meeting in hand as a business man would.”
If other business men were dominating the culture and the economy, a preacher who acted like a business man could be a success. Moody did not shout. He gave a simple message focused on the need for conversion and the love of God. The preacher was deeply critical of both sides in the growing debates that pitted liberal biblical scholarship against those who insisted the Bible was the literal truth. He did not see any fresh views on either side of the argument and wondered whether both could not just “let us get on with the practical work of the kingdom.”
The sins Moody denounced were attending the theater, disregarding the Sabbath, and believing atheistic teachings. Coming home to Jesus was the key for Moody, and home and Jesus often represented the same thing. He preached a gospel perfectly fitted to the growing sense of individualism in the United States. In describing his mission, he said, “I look upon this world as a wrecked vessel. God has given me a lifeboat and said to me, ‘Moody, save all you can.’”
Ira D. Sankey’s music was as important as the preaching at Moody’s revivals.
Some of the most popular hymns that Sankey led people in singing were written by Fanny J. Crosby, who wrote over 8,000 of them. The hymns, like the popular Pass Me Not, 0 Gentle Saviour, reflect an individualistic faith in which the focus is on divine comfort and love far more than on sin, divine judgment, or great social change.
Protestant Americans sang these hymns during Sunday morning services and at home around a piano—which those of the emerging middle class could now afford.
Electoral Politics
Between 1876 and 1896, electoral politics reflected the dominant middle-class inter-
ests of the era. While groups within the major parties and new political parties like the
Populists (see Chapter 18) protested against the poverty and corruption that was part
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order
17.3
Stalwarts
A faction of the Republican Party in the 1870s and 1880s who wanted the party to stay true to its earlier support for Reconstruction in the South and who were less connected to the emerging big-business interests than others.
Mugwumps
A reform faction of the Republican party who supported Cleveland, the Democratic nominee over the Republican Blaine in the 1884 election.
of the backdrop of the Gilded Age, the major parties, Republicans and Democrats alike, reflected the ideas and aspirations of the middle and upper classes. In a nation where a few were growing exorbitantly wealthy and a larger number were moving into new comforts, the leaders of the political parties had no interest in challenging the status quo.
In the 1870s and 1880s, the Republican Party was the political voice of most corporate leaders and most Protestants outside of the South. But the party was split between the heirs of the antislavery wing of the party—Stalwarts they called them-selves_and others who believed that it was time to forget about slavery and the goals of Reconstruction and simply embrace the nation’s growing prosperity. The party was also split along lines of personal animosity, none deeper than the hatred between Roscoe Conkling, Stalwart leader of the New York delegation in the Congress, and James G. Blaine, a Congressman from Maine since 1862 who had quickly risen over many more senior members to be Speaker of House. Blaine was among those ready to focus on the future; embrace the economy that Rockefeller, Carnegie, and Morgan were creating for the nation; and forget about reform efforts, whether in the form of the now-fading Reconstruction goals or the needs of the urban poor. Blaine was a man of great charm and eloquence but often seen as being too smooth and probably a participant in some of the worse corruption of the Grant administration.
After the tensions of the 1876 Hayes-Tilden election (see Chapter 15), the Republicans did not want to renominate President Hayes and turned instead to another Civil War veteran and compromise candidate from Ohio, James A. Garfield, who defeated the Democrats’ Union war hero Winfield Scott Hancock in the November 1880 election. Unlike many in either political party, Garfield was committed to civil service reform—ending the use of government jobs to reward political favorites—and to uniting Stalwarts and their opponents. His running mate was the New York customs collector Chester A. Arthur, better known for his ability to find government jobs for friends than for any reform agenda. Three months after the inauguration, Garfield was shot by a disgruntled office seeker, and although he seemed to be healing from his wounds, he died on September 19, 1881. Arthur became the president and, as some said, served a less undistinguished term than expected.
In 1884, Blaine was determined to stop Arthur’s renomination. He tried hard to convince yet another war hero, William T. Sherman, to run for president, but Sherman’s unequivocal response was, “If nominated I will not run, if elected I will not serve.” Eventually, the Republicans gave Blaine his turn as their candidate.
Governor Grover Cleveland was the Democratic nominee. Cleveland had fought corruption when he was mayor of Buffalo, New York, a reputation that propelled him to the governor’s office in 1882 and only 2 years later to the White House. Given Cleveland’s reputation for honesty and Blaine’s for corruption, a number of long-time Republicans campaigned for the Democrats. These party crossovers became known as Mugwumps, a word they claimed came from an Indian word for “big chief’ but that their opponents said meant someone whose mug was on one side of a fence while their “wump” was on the other.
In the midst of the 1884 campaign, a preacher from Buffalo revealed that Cleveland had fathered a child with a young widow, Maria Halpin, and then paid child support. Cleveland supporters said that Halpin had many boyfriends and that Cleveland was only protecting the others, some of whom were married. The nominee ordered his campaign to “Tell the truth.” While the nation faced serious economic choices, the campaigns fell to chanting “Blaine, Blaine, James G. Blaine, continental liar from the state of Maine,” against “Ma, ma, where’s my pa?” Just before the election, another preacher who supported Blaine castigated the Democrats as the “party of rum, Romanism, and rebellion,” a phrase that may have cost the Republicans key Catholic votes in New York state where Cleveland won by only 1,100 votes, which gave him a majority in the Electoral College.
^94 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Cleveland was not significantly different than the Republicans who served before him, though he did take a strong stand against the annexation of Hawaii and other expansionist efforts that Republicans had been pursuing. But as African-Americans in the South suffered from ever-increasing segregation and inequality, white and black farmers faced poverty, and workers began efforts to organize unions to end starvation wages, Cleveland, like the Republicans, tended to ignore their needs or, when pushed, sided with the corporations and their owners (see Chapter 18).
In a close race, Cleveland was defeated for reelection in 1888 by the Republican nominee, Civil War general and presidential grandson Benjamin Harrison, whose main campaign issues were Cleveland’s veto of a pension bill for all Civil War veterans and Cleveland’s return of Civil War banners to Southern states. A tactic called “waving the bloody shirt”—reminding everyone in the North that Republicans had won the Civil War while Democrats represented the states of the Confederacy—seemed to win elections for Republicans. Yet 4 years later, Cleveland, in a return match, defeated Harrison and served a second term from 1893 to 1897—the only president in history to serve nonconsecutive terms. It was Cleveland’s bad luck to begin his second term just as the Panic of 1893 began, and while his negotiations with J. P. Morgan may have avoided even worse disaster, the economic crisis of 1893 hurt many Americans. Ihe political stability of the 1870s and 1880s seemed to be coming to an end in the 1890s. Global Connections
American influence around the world grew dramatically during the Gilded Age. Americans had been sending missionaries to foreign countries since the early 1800s, but far greater numbers went abroad in the 1880s and 1890s. Dwight L. Moody called on young converts to consider careers as foreign missionaries, and some of them launched the China Inland Mission to convert China. Another Moody convert, John R. Mott, organized the Student Volunteer Movement that eventually sent over 5,000 missionaries to India, Africa, China, Japan, and the Middle East (the Movement later became the World Student Christian Federation). Individual churches and religious bodies sent their own preachers, teachers, and medical missionaries to all parts of the globe. Missionaries brought western values, a respect for human rights—especially women’s rights. However, they also brought American commercialism interests,
1
k.
While political leaders like Hayes, Garfield, and Cleveland vied for the presidency, many reformers were coming to the conclusion that the business trusts led by people like Rockefeller, Carnegie, and Morgan really controlled the country. This political cartoon from 1889 showed who many thought actually ran the Senate and the country.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order
perhaps unwittingly, to cultures that may or may not have wanted them. The missionaries were Quickly followed by merchants and industrialists, though missionaries sometimes led the protests against the commercialization of international relations. Returning missionaries became the voice of the world in many American communities, describing people and cultures unfamiliar to American audiences.
Missionaries were far from the only Americans to visit other parts of the globe during the Gilded Age. As the United States grew in population and industrial production, it became a player of growing importance in world markets, second only to Great Britain. After the Panic of 1873, many worried that the rapid growth in U.S. industrial productivity could become a problem rather than a boon. If the country produced more and more and depended only on domestic markets, then prices and income were doomed to keep falling. The only solution, some argued, was to find foreign markets, lots of foreign markets, to be sure that American products were sold all over the world, bringing new income to American producers. Exporting goods was nothing new to the United States, but after 1870, many U.S. business leaders intensified exporting efforts to sustain the nation’s economy. The total value of U.S. exports jumped from $234 million in 1865 to $1.5 billion in 1900, and the country was transformed from a debtor to a creditor nation.
In terms of commercial efforts, the United States had long been interested in Cuba. Southern Senators regularly suggested making the island a slave state before the Civil War, and in 1854, the American ambassadors to Europe’s leading powers issued the so-called Ostend Manifesto, demanding that Spain sell Cuba to the United States. After the Civil War, Cuba was no longer of value as a slave state, but interest in the island never disappeared from American politics. When a rebellion against Spanish rule broke out in Cuba in 1868, perhaps 100,000 Cubans died as a result while the island’s economy was devastated. U.S. merchants took advantage of the situation and bought sugar plantations, mines, and ranches in Cuba while U.S. diplomats forged an agreement with Spain for free and open trade between the island and the United States. By 1890, the United States was the dominant economic force on the island, and trade with Cuba was important for the U.S. economy.
The United States also had longstanding interests in Mexico. During the Civil War, Napoleon III had sent French troops to Mexico, installing Austrian Archduke Maximilian and his wife Carlotta as rulers of the country. Secretary of State Seward warned the French that their meddling was an “act of hostility,” and U.S. General Philip Sheridan informed Mexican revolutionaries that he had placed a substantial supply of weapons at the border and would look the other way if they disappeared. The supply vanished, and Maximilian was overthrown by a new government led by reform-minded Benito Juarez. Maximilian was executed by a revolutionary firing squad in June 1867. Later, Porfirio Diaz, who did not share Juarez’s reform agenda, claimed dictatorial power in Mexico. Diaz was anxious to expand U.S. investment in Mexico, and Americans bought railroads, mines, and oil exploration companies. By 1900, Americans had some $500 million invested in Mexico, enough to make the country a major trading partner and, indeed, to give American businesses significant influence in the Mexican economy and political life. Some feared Mexico was becoming almost an economic satellite of the United States.
U.S. commercial interests extended far beyond the Americas. In the 1870s, Belgium s King Leopold II created a private colony around the Congo River in Africa. It was a brutal affair. Residents of the Congo were pressed into slave labor on the vast rubber plantations that were meeting growing demands for rubber, and they were making Leopold very rich. Anxious to gain a new market, some businessmen persuaded President Arthur to recognize King Leopold’s.rule as the legitimate government of the Congo in 1884; however, Arthur’s successor, Grover Cleveland reduced U.S. involvement in light of the violent conditions.
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
In Europe, the growth of U.S. exports almost provoked a trade war between the United States and Europe s leading economic powers, including Britain, Germany, and France. Bad harvests in Europe starting in 1879 led to significant demand for American food, lifting the U.S. economy out of the last vestiges of the Panic of 1873. But European governments became nervous about their growing dependence on U.S. food and claimed that U.S. pork and beef was not safe, leading to a huge fall off in exports. The New York Herald urged “avenging the American hog” with a boycott of French wine and German sugar, but an eventual compromise led meat exports to be doubled.
In Asia, a U.S. Navy squadron sailed to Korea in 1867 but was sent away. But the U.S. Navy kept trying, as it had with Japan and China, and in 1882, Korea agreed to open itself to U.S. markets. The two governments signed the Treaty of Chemulpo after which Korean officers studied at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and the Brooklyn Navy Yard. While Korea remained a relatively small trading partner, the determination to open a country known as the “Hermit Kingdom” was typical of the era. From Korea to Latin America, the Congo, and Europe, the United States emerged from the Gilded Age as a trading partner of some importance not only in familiar countries but also in parts of the world previous generations had barely heard about.
B
Quick Review How did the expansion of industry contribute to changes in noneconomic arenas during the Gilded Age? IMMIGRATION
17.4
Explain the reasons immigrants came to the United States in such large numbers during the Gilded Age and what their experience was.
In the 75 years between 1815 and 1890, 15 million people immigrated to the United States, the great majority from northern Europe—Britain, Ireland, Germany, Scandinavia, Switzerland, and Holland. In the next 25 years, from 1890 until the start of World War I in 1914, 15 million additional immigrants came to the United States, and those immigrants came from new places—80 percent of them from Italy, Greece, Russia, the Empire of Austria-Hungary, Romania, and Turkey, and others from Japan, China, and Korea, as well as Mexico and other parts of Latin America. With their arrival, they changed the complexion of the nation. What all these immigrants had in common was a “push-pull” experience in which various factors pushed them to leave their home countries and, at the same time, other factors pulled them to try a new life in the United States.
The Push from Around the World
When Sadie Frowne described the desperate poverty of Poland or when the Lithuanian, Antanas Kaztauskis, expressed his family’s fear that he was about to be drafted into the Russian army, they were relating reasons that pushed hundreds of thousands of people to move not only from southern and eastern Europe—Italy, Greece, Poland, Russia, and so on—but also from China, Japan, and Korea to start new lives in the United States. Most of those who emigrated to the United States between 1890 and World War I did so in large part because something, often grinding poverty and fear of persecution, pushed them to get out of the places where they and their families had lived for many generations, and the pull of hoped-for new lives and new prosperity attracted them to the United States (see Map 17-2).
Nowhere was the push to leave greater than in Russia and Russian-dominated parts of eastern Europe including the Ukraine, Lithuania, and Poland. Abraham Cahan, who came to the United States from Russia as a young man, explained what
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and
OCEAN
AUSTRALIA
Main groups Chinese 370,000 Japanese 275,000
From Canada	2,200,000
From Europe	30,000,000
Main groups
5,000,000 4,500,000 4,500,000 2,600,000 2,600,000 2,000,000
From Latin America 900,000
Germans
Irish
Italians
Poles
English
Jews
SOUTH / AMERICA \
0	1,500	3,000 Miles
0	1,500	3,000 Kilometers

MAP 17-2 Immigration to the United States. Between 1820 and 1914, but especially between 1880 and 1914, immigrants transformed the United States.This map shows where they came from and how many arrived.
Pogroms
Government-directed attacks against Jewish citizens, property, and villages in tsarist Russia beginning in the 1880s; a primary reason for Russian Jewish migration to the United States.
drove him: “The government itself had set off the pogroms in order to save the throne from a revolutionary upheaval. By making the Jews the scapegoats, it had confused the common people so that in the end the peasants were certain that the Jews and not the Czar were the cause of their troubles.” Golda Meir, who became a school teacher in Milwaukee and one day would be Prime Minister of Israel, remembered,
I can still recall distinctly hearing about a pogrom that was to descend on us... with the rabble that used to surge through town, brandishing knives and huge sticks, screaming ‘Christ killers’ as they looked for the Jews.
Pogroms—anti-Jewish attacks —became increasingly common in Russia at the end of the 1800s. They were not only tolerated but also often actively encouraged by the Russian government and the Russian Orthodox Church.
After the assassination of Czar Alexander II in 1881, the government ordered that all Jews in Russia must move to the Pale of Settlement, a region that stretched from the Baltic in the north to the Black Sea in the south. Jews were not allowed to travel into the rest of Russia. Within the Pale, though there was a thriving Jewish community and culture, there was desperate poverty. Jews were not allowed to own land. Another immigrant remembered, “There were ten times as many stores as there should have been, ten times as many tailors, cobblers, barbers, tinsmiths.” Leaving Russia seemed the only solution to such conditions.
For Italian peasants there were no pogroms, but there was plenty of violence and poverty. When Italy was united as a nation in 1871—following a movement known as the Risorgimento—wealth and industry were concentrated in the north and the Mezzogiorno, as southern Italy was known, was a land of poverty where massive soil erosion made farming almost impossible. In 1906, Mount Vesuvius erupted, destroying towns and some of the rich grape-growing farmland that remained. Facing
498 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
American Voices
Sadie Frowne, A Polish Sweatshop Girl, 1906
17.1
Sadie Frowne's account of her move from a small village in Russia to become a garment worker New York City's Lower East Side is representative of the life experience of thousands of immigrants.
My mother...kept a little grocer's shop in the little village where we lived at first. That was in Poland, somewhere on the frontier...She had a wagon in which she used to drive about the country, selling her groceries, and sometimes she worked in the fields with my father.
When I was a little more than 10 years of age my father died. He was a good man and a steady worker, and we never knew what it was to be hungry while he lived. After he died troubles began, for the rent of our shop was about $6 a month, and then there were food and clothes to provide. We needed little, it is true, but even soup, black bread, and onions we could not always get....
Mother wrote to Aunt Fanny, who lived in New York, and told her how hard it was to live in Poland, and Aunt Fanny advised her to come and bring me... .She said we should both come at once, and she went around among our relatives in New York and took up a subscription for our passage.
We came by steerage on a steamship in a very dark place that smelt dreadfully. There were hundreds of other people packed in with us, men, women and children, and almost all of them were sick. It took us 12 days to cross the sea, and we thought we should die, but at last the voyage was over and we came up and saw the beautiful bay and the big woman with the spikes on her head and the lamp that is lighted at night in her hand (Goddess of Liberty)....
So I went to work in Allen Street (Manhattan) in what they call a sweatshop, making skirts by machine. I was new at the work and the foreman scolded me a great deal....
In Poland I and my father and mother used to go to the synagogue on the Sabbath, but here the women don't go to the synagogue much, though the men do. They are shut up working hard all week long, and when the Sabbath comes they like to sleep long in bed and afterward they must go out where they can breathe the air....
Some of the women blame me very much because I spend so much money on clothes. They say that instead of a dollar a week I ought not to spend more than 25c a week on clothes, and that I should save the rest. But a gir, must have clothes if she is to go into good society at Ulmer Park or Coney Island or the theater. Those who blame me are the old country people who have old-fashioned notions, but the people who have been here a long time know better. A girl who does not dress well is stuck in a corner, even if she is pretty, and Aunt Fanny says that I do just right to put on plenty of style.
Source: Sadie Frowne, "A Polish Sweatshop Girl," in Hamilton Holt, editor The Life Stories of Undistinguished Americans as Told by Themselves (originally 1906, republished New York: Routledge, 2000), pp. 21-28.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to the author, what led to her mother's decision to move to America?
2.	Synthesis
What elements of the author's story make it typical of immigrant stories of the period?
poverty, criminal gangs, and chaos, some 4 million Italians, almost all from the south, left Italy between 1880 and 1914. Unlike the Jews coming from Russia, many of the Italian immigrants hoped one day to return home after making some money, and perhaps one in four did return. Those who came, whether temporarily or permanently, settled in major American cities and took on some of the hardest work at the bottom ranks of the American economy.
Russian Jews and southern Italian Catholics were far from alone. All across Europe, the population was growing faster than the land could support. Immigration provided a way out. Political upheaval in many places led to violence. Turkish violence against the Christian minority, especially the massacres of 1894, 1895, and 1896, led many Armenians to leave for America. Roman Catholics in Orthodox areas like Lithuania and Orthodox believers facing persecution in Catholic or Muslim countries wanted to move.
Chinese immigrants had been coming to the West Coast since the Gold Rush of 1849, but poverty and continued political turmoil kept them coming, though the numbers were slowed significantly after 1882 when Congress passed the Chinese Exclusion Act. Until 1882, immigration had been a relatively easy matter for the Chinese. If one could afford the passage, one simply booked it and then walked off the ship in San Francisco.
Chinese Exclusion Act
Federal legislation that suspended Chinese immigration, limited the civil rights of resident Chinese, and forbade their naturalization.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social
Ordfl
II
Part VI
This Italian woman with her children at Ellis Island, the main Atlantic coast port of entry for immigrants, represented the way many families came to the United States. A father would come first and, later, after making some money, send for his wife and children, who followed on their own.
However, many in California and other parts of the West were threatened by the Chinese who by their sheer numbers increased the competition for jobs or mining claims. After a string of anti-immigrant petitions led Congress to change the law—the first time an entire nationality was barred from the country—only Chinese who could prove to the satisfaction of new immigration agents that they were either returning citizens or that they brought with them educational, economic, or diplomatic skills were allowed into the United States. Japanese immigrants, however, began to arrive, especially after 1885 when the emperor ended a ban on emigration and increased taxes to build up the government, causing many farmers to lose their fields.
In addition, about 300,000 French-Canadians moved from Quebec into the United States between 1860 and 1900, especially into New England and New York. Remote villages in Mexico experienced almost constant revolutionary violence in the late 1800s and early 1900s as regime followed regime. As a result, many Mexicans moved across the Rio Grande into the United States to find jobs on farms, mines, or fields in Texas and California, greatly expanding an earlier Mexican-American community that had been in the United States since the changing border made them Americans in the 1840s. Eventually some 4 million Italians, 2 million Russian Jews (one-third of all of the Jews in Russia), and 9 million other immigrants from almost every other part of the planet came to the United States in the 30-year period before 1920.
The Pull from an Industrializing United States
While there was good reason to leave Russia or Italy or Japan or Mexico, among other places, in the late 1800s, there were also reasons to want to come to the United States. The pull of opportunity was as important as the push of poverty and oppression. Although stories of the wealth to be found in the United States often led to terrible disappointment, the conditions in the United States were often still significantly better than what immigrants had left behind.
Prospective immigrants learned about jobs and opportunities from many sources. In a small village in Lithuania, Antanas Kaztauskis heard a man who lived in his village talk about the success of his son who was working in the stockyards in Chicago and who had sent his father a Lithuanian language newspaper from Chicago where the old man read of the rights of “life, liberty, and the getting of happiness.”
American employers, often short of workers during economic boom times, advertised for help, even publishing a guidebook, Where to Emigrate and Why, in 1869. Steamship companies advertised for passengers, who could now, they claimed, take advantage of quicker travel times—14 days in 1867 and perhaps 6 days by 1900—all in safer and healthier conditions.
In Japan, farmers heard that a plantation laborer in the Kingdom of Hawaii could earn six times more than in Japan. It might be possible in a few years of working in Hawaii or the United States to save enough to return home, buy new land and make a fresh start in Japan. Many Japanese women saw the opportunity to start a new life as a “picture bride” for a Japanese immigrant who was already in Hawaii or the United States. In a culture in which arranged marriages were the norm and in which women were encouraged to become educated and make their own way in the world, the idea of women, traveling to a new land, starting a new life with a new husband, did not seem so strange. Riyo Orite, said of her experience, “I was engaged at the age of 16 and didn t meet Orite until I was almost 18.1 had seen him only in a picture at first.... Being young, I was unromantic. I just believed that girls should get married....[P] eople around me praised the match.”
Mexicans who returned after spending time in the United States came back to families and friends with shoes and good suits of clothes.” Others who moved north

wrote to family and friends, “Come! Come! Come over, it is good here!” Jesus Garza remembered, As I had heard a lot about the United States it was my dream to come here.” And many did come.
Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914

The Reality—Jobs, Cities, and Americanization
When immigrants arrived in the United States, they did not always find what they had
been expecting or hoping for. Italian immigrants often summed up their experience:
Back in the old country, the young and naive immigrants had been told that the streets of America were paved with gold. But when they got here, they discovered three important things: First, the streets weren’t paved in gold; second, they weren’t paved at all; and third, they were expected to pave them.
Few immigrants were quite as naive as the story implies, but the popularity of the story in Italian immigrant communities says a lot about the reality of the immigration experience.
When arriving immigrants from Europe first landed, the authorities were not always welcoming. New York was the prime point of entry. In 1892, the federal government built a new immigration center on Ellis Island in the harbor, which replaced the old one at Castle Garden at the tip of Manhattan. Ellis Island combined quarantine, customs, and reception. Twelve million people came through Ellis Island before it closed in 1954. It could be an intimidating experience as clerks asked a battery of questions, trying to be sure that no physically or mentally ill people or troublemakers were allowed into the country. They did not make life easy for anyone. Nevertheless, only about two percent of those who arrived at Ellis Island were actually turned away.
Those who were not permitted to enter typically either carried disease or came across in some way as unlikely to be able to support themselves.
During this process at Ellis Island, the clerks often gave immigrants a new anglicized name. A Russian named Cooperstein became Cooper, a Finn named Huttama became Hanson, or a Greek named Kiriacopoulis became Campbell. In one case, a German Jew became so confused with all the questions he was being asked that he forgot his own name. When he responded to the clerk’s question about his name with “Ich vergesse” (“I forget”), the clerk registered him as Ferguson.
Steamships from Europe also docked in Boston or Philadelphia where the government established similar centers. Immigrants from Canada and Mexico were sometimes processed at border crossing points, while at other times, they simply walked or rode across the long borders between the countries. In the Southwest, people had long traveled back and forth across the Rio Grande, and they did not stop doing so.
On the Pacific coast, most immigrants came through the Port of San Francisco. In 1910, the federal government created a processing center on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay that was designed to be a kind of West Coast Ellis Island. Over the next 30 years 175,000 immigrants entered the United States through Angel Island, the vast majority of them Chinese. Similar but smaller stations were created in other ports, especially Seattle.
Although Angel Island might have been designed as a counterpart to Ellis Island, it was a very different place. At both islands, immigrants faced frightening medical inspections and batteries of questions from federal immigration agents. But while most of those coming through Ellis Island left within a day, many on Angel Island were kept for weeks or months, occasionally for years. From the time of the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882 until changes in U.S. policy in 1943, only Chinese immigrants who could prove that they were returning U.S. citizens or the children of U.S. citizens were allowed into the country. The Chinese immigrant population was essentially frozen at its 1882 levels.
However, the destruction of all federal records in the earthquake and fire in San Francisco in April 1906 meant that if someone claimed to be a U.S. citizen, it was hard to disprove the claim. So-called “paper sons,” came to the United States with high hopes that they could answer the required questions and gain admission to a country where they could make some money and avoid the wars and famine in China. Some succeeded. Others were deported back to China. As a result, Angel Island became a place of constant tension. Paul Chow, whose parents had come through Angel Island, remembered the fear the place evoked in his family. “Whenever my mother would mention it, she’d say, ‘Angel Island, shhh,”’ he said. “I thought it was all one word ‘Angelislandshh.’”
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order



Arrival at Angel Island in San Francisco might mean long waits in confining conditions for Asian immigrants like these Japanese women.
Melting pot
An often popular idea that somehow immigrants from other countries should quickly lose their culture and language and "melt" into being just like other Americans.
Although the phrase “melting pot” became a popular way to describe the influx of immigrants during the height of the immigration boom, the reality in United States was not quite what the popular phrase indicated. The term melting pot came from a play by Israel Zangwill, produced in New York in 1908, in which the hero wants to forget the pain of his life as a Jew in czarist Russia and announces that he is happy to be in America “Gods Crucible,” where he can be part of “the great Melting-Pot where all the races of Europe are melting and reforming.” In fact, many of those who arrived had no interest in “melting” into a common American culture but were, instead, creating a richly diverse nation of far more ethnic and cultural variety than had ever been seen before.
For Jews arriving in New York, the next step after leaving Castle Garden or Ellis Island was often to make their way to the Lower East Side of Manhattan, the heart of the Jewish community. To be in the Lower East Side in the 1880s and 1890s was, as Rose Cohen said, as though “we were still in our village in Russia.” There was little actual cultural melting going on, though people slowly took on more and more American ways. While one found friends there, living conditions were hard in some of those most crowded blocks in the country. The American Magazine described Lower East Side tenement housing in 1888:
They are great prison-like structures of brick, with narrow doors and windows, cramped passages and steep rickety stairs....The narrow court-yard... in the middle is a damp foul-smelling place, supposed to do duty as an airshaft....In the hot summer months...these fire-escape balconies are used as sleeping-rooms by the poor wretches who are fortunate enough to have windows opening upon them.
Bathrooms were at the end of the hall and were shared by multiple apartments.
Most apartments were packed with people as families crowded into tiny rooms and
took in borders who would help pay the rent. One 1908 survey found that 50 percent of families slept three or four persons to a room and another 25 percent had five or more persons per room.
Jewish immigrants found work where they could. Jewish peddlers sold nearly everything—fruit, vegetables, fish, clothing, kitchen utensils—filling streets like
Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914


P'WI

W

CIGARETTES
-■<

> -i

M

f js.1
-X
17 J


'J-n

•&

L*
"AV^v *< >’W
Hester Street in New York's Lower East Side was the heart of the city's immigrant community.
Delancey Street with pushcart after pushcart, all selling something different and trying to convince passers-by to purchase. Even more Jewish immigrants found work in the garment industry. Many Russian Jews had survived as tailors (the Singer sewing machine was a major export from the United States to Russia). In America, skill with a needle meant a job. The demand for uniforms for the Union army led to the establishment of standard sizes for clothing, first for men and later for women, and this change allowed the development of mass-produced rather than individualized clothing. Because of the development of standard sizes, the garment trade was able to shift from made-to-order work for the elite to mass production of clothing for everyone. Men’s suits and pants, women’s dresses and shirtwaists, as blouses were called, were produced in the thousands, making the clothing business a major industry.
At first, garment work was done at home as families or small groups took in piece work and returned the finished products. Later, larger factories, known as sweatshops, brought together sometimes hundreds of workers who were expected to sew at a fast pace for long hours to ensure that they kept their jobs and the owners made a decent profit. One could walk for blocks in southern Manhattan and see nothing but such
Sweatshops
Small, poorly ventilated shops or apartments crammed with workers, often family members, who pieced together garments.
Garment workers sewing by hand in a small New York City sweatshop in1908. Photograph by Lewis Hine.
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Order
work going on from early morning to late evening. In spite or perhaps because—of the harsh living and working conditions, New York s Jewish community grew strong. Russian Jews had no intention of returning to Russia where pogroms and poverty reigned. They established synagogues, foreign language newspapers provided news, and some 300 Hebrew schools maintained their language and culture.
Italian immigrants also created their own neighborhoods. In Chicago, Taylor Street became the heart of Little Italy. In Milwaukee, the Third Ward on the east side was the heart of the Italian community where some 20 Italian grocery stores existed on Brady Street alone. In Boston, the North End and East Boston housed Italian communities. And in New York, many Italian immigrants, like Russian Jewish immigrants, moved to the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Pull of Nostalgia, the Push to Continue
In 1906, the Jewish Daily Forward, a Yiddish-language newspaper serving Jewish immigrants, began carrying an advice column in which the editor, Abraham Cahan responded to letters. One writer, a recent immigrant from Russia, said:
Oh, my poor dear parents, how saddened they were at my leaving. The leave-taking, their seeing me on my way, was like a silent funeral....I came to America and became a painter. My great love for Hebrew, for Russian, all my other knowledge was smeared with paint. During the year that I have been here I have had some good periods, but I am not happy because I have no interest in anything. My homesickness and loneliness darken my life....I want to run back...and I beg you to be my counsel as to how to act.
The editor was blunt noting that "almost all immigrants yearn deeply for dear ones and home at first," but that the young man "must not consider going home, but try to take root here. He should try to overcome all these emotions and strive to make something of himself so that in time he will be able to bring his parents here."
That same year, Hamilton Holt, editor of the New York Independent, published The Life Stories of Undistinguished Americans As Told by Themselves, 27 accounts of the immigrant experience including several by those who considered a return to their homeland but who had decided against it. An Italian immigrant who shined shoes in New York City who wrote:
We had said that when we saved $1,000 each we would go back to Italy and buy a farm, but now that the time is coming we are so busy and making so much money that we think we will stay.
A
Swedish immigrant who prospered as a farmer in Minnesota wrote: Father and mother kept writing to the children in America that now they had made their fortunes they should come home and live, but they put it off...., am going over to
Sweden soon to keep Christmas there....but will come back again, and maybe bring other people with us. Some Swedes go to the old country every Christmas.
A modern researcher, Erika Lee, found that her great-great-great-grandfather, Moy Dong Kee, had come to California in 1854, before the Chinese Exclusion Act limited Chinese mobility. Though he stayed in the United States for 52 years, he was able to make at least three trips to visit his family who remained in China. He finally retired to China in 1906 at the age of 72.
Some immigrants indeed traveled back and forth often. Others made their fortunes in America and then returned to their homelands. Perhaps a quarter or more of all Italian immigrants eventually returned to Italy, an unusually high percentage among immigrant communities, but a little money earned in America could translate into land ownership in Italy. In other immigrant communities—especially among Russian Jews facing pogroms and conscription into the czarist army—very few ever returned. The pull of nostalgia and the usually stronger push to continue to make a life in their new adopted home was part of the life of almost every immigrant.
Source: Isaac Metzker, A Bintel Brief: Sixty Years of Letters from the Lower East Side to the Jewish Daily Forward (New York: Doubleday, 1971), pp. 117-118. cited in Robert D. Marcus, et al, America Firsthand: Volume Two, Readings from Reconstruction to the Present (Boston: Bedford/St. Martins, 2004), pp. 121-122.
Thinking Critically
1.	Crafting an Argument
What do the reasons immigrants gave for wanting to leave or wanting to stay tel, you about their reasons for immigrating in the first place?
2.	Contextualization
Why might some immigrants have found it easier than others to return to their home country? Why was such a trip almost impossible for others?
”‘^81
04 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Since most Italian immigrants came from the rural poverty of southern Italy, they had few marketable skills when they got to the United States. Like Russian Jews, some became pushcart owners, selling fruits and vegetables. Others opened restaurants. More than a few became the laborers who built the cities where they lived: New York, Chicago, Milwaukee, and Boston all have water and sewer lines dug by Italian laborers. Gender roles were, perhaps, more rigidly defined in the Italian immigrant communities than elsewhere. Italian families tried every way they could to encourage married women to stay at home and to depend on the men to earn a living for the family.
For the 900,000 French Canadians who emigrated to the United States between 1840 and 1930, the move south meant escape from rural poverty and a chance for a new start, especially in the mills of New England. More than most immigrant groups, those coming from Quebec tended to bring their priests (nearly all French Canadians were Catholic), doctors, lawyers, and grocers with them, all of whom were sure that life might be better—or at least marginally more prosperous—in rapidly industrializing New York and New England than in the isolated farms of Quebec.
Like the Italians and the French Canadians, Mexican immigrants often moved back and forth between the United States and home communities, but in their case, that move meant crossing only a river rather than an ocean. Nevertheless, more and more immigrants from Mexico eventually made permanent homes in the United States, creating the barrios, which were often extensions of Mexican communities that had long stretched along the border from Texas to California.
Mexican-American communities, like those of European immigrants, often reflected quite different home regions. One immigrant remembered, “We came to know families from Chihuahua, Sonora, Jalisco, and Durango. Some had come to the United States even before the revolution, living in Texas before migrating to California.” The barrio was also home in other ways. Immigrants from Mexico could find familiar food, including tamales, frijoles, tortillas, and menudo. They could see traditional clothing, enjoy traditional holidays and festivals, and feel much less like strangers in someone else’s land.
For all Catholic immigrants, the Catholic Church was an essential link with their faith and their past. At the end of the U.S. Civil War, there were 42 dioceses and 3,000 Catholic churches in the United States. By 1900, there were 70 dioceses and 10,000 churches, many serving specific ethnic communities. The Italian parish, the Polish parish, the Mexican parish, and the German parish might be in very close proximity, but they served their own group, often offering parochial schools and classes in a home language that was important to parents coping with children growing up in an English-speaking society.
Those who entered the United States from Asia found different kinds of work in their own ethnic communities. Chinese immigrants such as Lee Chew found work when they could:
When I got to San Francisco... [a] man got me work as a house servant in an American family, and my start was the same as that of almost all the Chinese in this country. The Chinese laundryman does not learn his trade in China; there are no laundries in China... .All Chinese laundrymen here were taught in the first place by American women just as I was taught.
For the Japanese in Hawaii (an independent country until 1898), housing and work
were found on the sugar plantations, which were new to them. Hawaiian companies
encouraged whole families to immigrate, believing that “dependable married men
made better workers, though both women and men were given jobs in the fields.
Japanese communities were able to establish themselves with their own traditions,
religious practices including Buddhist temples, Japanese-language schools for chil-
dren, and festivals including the Emperor s Birthday when work ceased in spite of
the frustration of the plantation owners. In time, Japanese, Portuguese, Chinese, and
Chapter 17 The Gilded Age: Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a New Social Orden
'M 1
native Hawaiian workers got to know one another other, exchanged food, and developed real if tenuous friendships.
17.4
Quick Review Which were more important in bringing immigrants to the United States in the late 1800s and early 1900s—the push factors or the pull factors? Give at least three reasons to justify your answer.
CONCLUSION
Ihe well-named Gilded Age was a time of great extremes. In the decades after the Civil War, Americans built bigger corporations, cities, and buildings than ever before. Some made huge fortunes and lived a life of lavish spending. Other Americans created a new middle class. Still others, especially immigrants living in tightly packed urban communities, lived on the edge of poverty while also creating new cultures with their own values and norms. All of them created a vastly different nation than any previous generation had known.
During the Gilded Age, America emerged as an industrial giant. Technological innovation and vast reserves of coal, oil, steel, and timber, along with well-established but expanding railroad networks, fueled a growing economy. New forms of corporate ownership developed to direct and manage large-scale industrial operations, and private investment banks grew immensely rich and influential along with the industrialists whose ventures they helped to finance. The few who managed to generate great wealth often spent lavishly on homes and possessions as a reflection of their power and position, sealing the reputation of the period as one of shameless excess gotten by ruthless economic exploitation.
While a few grew enormously wealthy, a new middle class also emerged in the Gilded Age. Made up mostly of the families of men who worked at the middle levels and managed the large new corporations, the middle class created its own new lifestyle. City services—from a healthy supply of water to new high-rise buildings with elevators to giant department stores catered to the needs of this growing middle class. Many in the middle class also sought some distance from the cities, and the rail and trolley lines facilitated the growth of suburbs in which large private homes replaced apartments and people enjoyed a mix of urban and rural amenities. From religion to sports to politics, the United States catered to the new middle class.
The rapidly expanding new industries needed workers, and the call for workers exerted a pull on people living in far distant places, including Russia, Italy, China, and Japan. At the same time, developments in these and other countries were creating a push that led many to want to leave. Whether it was the anti-Jewish pogroms in Russia or the grinding poverty of Italy or the civil wars that wracked China, the chance to leave for a better life was so appealing that the United States experienced a massive era of immigration between 1880 and 1914. Once in the United States, immigrants were not always welcomed. Many native-born Americans distrusted what they saw as foreign cultures. Many immigrants resisted giving up old ways. But the jobs—though low level and low pay—were there and immigrants began working in agriculture and in the booming urban sweatshops that were clothing the country and the world.
As a result of all of these changes, by 1900, the United States was a very different place than it had been only a few short decades earlier.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
What were the three biggest differences in the United States in 1900 as a result of the events, trends, and innovations of the Gilded Age?
>06 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
Chapter 17 Chapter Review
TECHNOLOGY CHANGES THE NATION
LIVES OF THE MIDDLE CLASS IN THE GILDED AGE
17.1
Explain the inventions of the late 1800s and their impact
Review Questions
1.	Crafting an Argument
In your opinion, what was the most important technological innovation of the late 1800s? Why?
2.	Historical Interpretation
How does the rise of the automobile industry illustrate the connection between technological innovation and industrial growth and consolidation in the late 1800s and early 1900s?
173
Analyze daily life, popular ideas, and political direction for the middle class during the Gilded Age.
Review Questions
6.	Contextualization
How did architecture and urban design of the late 1800s reflect middle-class values and aspirations?
7.	Synthesis
What connections can you make between the growth of American business and changes in American religious life in the late 1800s?
CORPORATIONS AND MONOPOLIES
17.2
Analyze the role of the new giant corporations in American life.
Review Questions
3.	Historical Interpretation
What does the Panic of 1873 tell us about the role of speculation in the American economy of the late 1800s?
4.	Comparison
Compare and contrast American manufacturing in the early 1900s and the late 1900s. What had changed? Why?
5.	Historical Interpretation
What does J. P. Morgan’s involvement in the Panic of 1893 and in its resolution tell us about the nature of American industry at the turn of the century?
17.4
IMMIGRATION_____________________________________________
Explain the reasons immigrants came to the United States in such large numbers during the Gilded Age and what their experience was.
Review Questions
8.	Cause and Effect
What factors explain the migration of large numbers of eastern European Jews to the United States at the turn of the century?
9.	Comparison
What did immigrants hope to find in America? How did their expectations compare with reality?
10.	Historical Interpretation
What might explain the formation of ethnic neighborhoods in the late 1800s? What advantages did such neighborhoods provide to new immigrants?
Chapter 17
The Gilded Age:
Building a Technological and Industrial Giant and a
New Social Order
184
18.2
183
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the rapid industrialization after the Civil War impacted the lives of diverse people and the rise of distinct resistance movements.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
CONFLICT IN THE NEW SOUTH_____________________
Analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of Reconstruction created the unique character of the New South.
THE POLITICS OF CONFLICT—FROM POPULIST MOVEMENT TO POPULIST PARTY
Analyze how agrarian unrest and protest came to have a significant impact on American politics.
WORKER PROTEST AND THE RISE OF ORGANIZED LABOR_____________________________
Explain the tensions in industrial America that led to major labor strife between the 1870s and 1914.

Drivers and mules with young laborers in a West Virginia coal mine in a 1908 photo by Lewis Hine.
When he accepted the nomination of the newly growing Socialist Party for president in the 1912 presidential elections, Eugene V. Debs said:
The world’s workers have always been and still are the world’s slaves. They have...produced all the world’s wealth and supported all the world’s governments. They have conquered all things but their own freedom.
It was the goal of the Socialist Party, Debs said, to win that freedom. Debs had an expansive goal for his political organization—a party for women and men, blacks and whites, struggling farmers as well as factory and railroad workers. When the presidential election was held in November, Debs won some 900,000 votes, or 6 percent of the total. Although that percentage was small, it reflected nonetheless unusual support for a nontraditional candidate.
In a nation in the midst of rapid social change, Debs sought to speak for those being hurt by the changes. Although he failed to rally as many as he hoped to his political banner, his campaign reflected the deep tensions in the United States in the late 1800s and early 1900s. In the face of extraordinary
►8 Part VI Becoming an Industrial World Power—Costs, Benefits, and Responses 1865-1914
v
18.1
Significant Dates
technological and industrial change, many were angry. This chapter traces the reasons so many Americans were angry in the years between 1877 and 1914 and the results of that anger in reshaping the political and cultural life of the nation. Chapter 19 traces the ways that yet other Americans began to tackle the problems of this era.
CONFLICT IN THE NEW SOUTH_____________________
Analyze how the combined impact of industrialism and the end of Reconstruction created the unique character of the New South.
In 1886, the young editor of the Atlanta Constitution, Henry Grady, was invited to New York City to speak at the prestigious New England Society of New York, one of the city’s most elite groups. Coming 20 years after the end of the Civil War, the invitation was quite an honor for a Southern newspaper editor. The society, like Grady, was ready for a fresh start regarding the nations regional differences. Grady was in New York to tell his audience that a New South had been born. The New South was not like the old version. It had been born, Grady said, out of the defeat of the Souths “brave armies” in the late war and the ending of slavery. A new day had begun. But it had begun under leaders who, though moving in new ways, were proud of their past and wanted to be clear, “The South has nothing for which to apologize... .The South has nothing to take back.”
The New South meant several things to Grady. First, Grady was saying that that the South was done apologizing for the Civil War, for slavery, and for the increasingly rigid social, political, and economic segregation that was developing in place of slavery. On race relations, the South, Grady said, wanted to be left alone. Grady was also announcing that the South had come of age economically. It was building railroads and industrializing at an impressive pace, and Southerners wanted to be fully integrated into the economic prosperity of the rest of the nation. On the economic front, the New South that Grady was discussing was indeed different from the Old South.
Economic Development and Economic Optimism
1877	Great Railroad Strike
1882	Agricultural Wheel farmers' organization
launched
1886	Haymarket bombing
Henry Grady announces the"New South"
Charles W. Macune elected president of the Farmers'Alliance beginning its rapid growth
1890	New Mississippi state constitution effectively excludes blacks from voting
Farmers'Alliance establishes headquarters in Washington, DC
United Mine Workers of America founded in Columbus, Ohio
1891	The People's Party (Populists) launched
1892	Homestead strike
1893	American Railway Union organized
1894	Coxey's Army marches on Washington, DC Pullman strike
U.S.
Supreme Court's Plessy v. Ferguson decision William Jennings Bryan runs for president on Democratic and Populist Party tickets
1905 Industrial Workers of the World organized Niagara Movement organized
1909 National Association for the Advancement of Colored People launched
i
i
The pre-Civil War South had been dominated by agriculture. In the New South, sawmills, factories, mines, and railroads were being built, and old wooden buildings were being replaced with new brick ones in many towns. Optimism was growing, though not everyone was celebrating. The decline in the price of cotton was devastating farmers, and for most African-Americans, segregation and exclusion made life almost unbearable. Nevertheless, for a fortunate subset of white Southerners, the years between 1875 and 1900 were a time for optimism.
Before the Civil War, the South had far fewer miles of railroad track than the North. Catching up on railroad construction was a key element in defining the New South. The new railroads brought all sorts of change. The investment in building railroads— much of it Northern or European money—brought work to many Southerners, not only those who did the actual work of laying track but also those supporting them. As one Mississippi resident noted, “The women and children were busy producing vegetable crops, chickens, eggs, milk and butter, and the men were butchering and delivering fresh meat and other supplies to the men working on the railroad.” Once the new lines were in place, there were also jobs working on the railroads. The work was dangerous and injuries were common, but the pay was better than anything many Southerners had seen.
The rail lines provided Southerners with important new connections to the outside world (see Maps 18-1A and 18-IB). A generation earlier, rail lines had connected many parts of the North, but when the rail lines finally reached an isolated town like Harrison, Arkansas, in February 1900, the local newspaper announced, “Harrison is a Rail-road Town At Last.” Henry Hammond, an astute observer of Southern life, pointed out that country people “who formerly were satisfied with their weekly paper, who went to town annually or semiannually, in some instances not more than two
1911	Triangle Shirtwaist Fire
1912	Bread and Roses strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts
1914 Colorado miner's strike
New South
An ideology developed by some elite Southerners that declared an end to the nostalgia for slavery and plantation life and a beginning for the economic development of the South while protecting the growing racial segregation of the region from any Northern interference.
fe
