Chapter 23 Living in a
23.1
Significant Dates
1939	September 1: Nazi Germany invades Poland, Great Britain and France declares war on Germany
Winter 1939-40: "Phony War"
1940	April-May: Hitler invades Denmark, Norway, Holland, Belgium, Luxembourg, then France
July: Battle of Britain begins
September: America First Committee launched, United States negotiates Destroyer-for-bases deal with Britain, Congress institutes military draft November: FDR elected for third term
1941	January: FDR proposes Lend-Lease effort and four freedoms
June: A. Philip Randolph threatens March on Washington, FDR creates Fair Employment Practices Commission
October: USS Kearny attacked, Reuben James sunk
December 7: Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor
1942	March: Japanese internment begins
April-May: Bataan and Corregidor surrender
May: Pacific battle of Coral Sea
June: Naval battle of Midway Island
August: U.S. attack on Guadalcanal
November: Kaiser shipyards produce Liberty ship in 5 days
1943	January: Churchill in Casablanca
June: U.S. Treasury begins withholding taxes
July: Invasion of Italy begins
November: FDR meets Churchill and Stalin at Teheran
1944	June 6: D-Day, Allied invasion of Europe October: MacArthur returns to Philippines November: FDR elected to a fourth term
1945	February: U.S. troops attack Iwo Jima
April 12: FDR dies, Harry S. Truman becomes president
May: Germany surrenders, war in Europe is over
August: United States drops atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan surrenders, World War II ends
23.1
PREPAREDNESS AND ISOLATION,
1939-1941________________________________________ Explain support for and opposition to the growing U.S. support for Britain and growing tensions with Japan.
When Germany attacked Poland in September 1939, Britain and then France declared war on Germany. Europe was at war. Neither Japan nor the United States intervened. After the rapid German defeat of Poland that fall, the winter of 1939-40 was known as the “Phony War” since there was so little fighting. Poland disappeared, split between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. Britain and France waited for an attack they knew would come—and the war did not stay phony.
The Battle of Britain
At the beginning of 1940, Hitler hinted at peace initiatives, then in April invaded Denmark and Norway and quickly defeated both. On May 10, Germany unleashed its Blitzkrieg (lightning war) on Holland, Belgium, and Luxembourg, bombing Rotterdam into rubble and sending in airborne and ground troops. All three countries surrendered.
On May 14, 1,800 German tanks crossed the border into France, overran the Maginot Line (see Chapter 22), which turned out to be useless, and turned toward Paris. Italy joined Germany, declaring war on France on June 10. On June 22,1940, France surrendered. For the next several years, Germany directly governed northern France, including Paris, while a puppet government, led by the aging French World War I hero, Marshall Philippe Petain, governed the southern part of France known as Vichy France from a capital in the town of Vichy. By the summer of 1940, Hitler was the master of Europe (see Map 23-1).
Only Great Britain stood against Germany. As the German forces rushed toward Paris, they attempted to cut off a retreat by French and British armies. But 338,000 British, French, and allied troops were evacuated from the beaches of Dunkirk, leaving nearly all equipment behind. In a radio broadcast, the new British Prime Minister Winston Churchill promised, “We shall go on to the end,” but he added, Britain would hold out “until in God’s good time, the new world, with all its power and might, [shall] step forth to the rescue and the liberation of the old.” It was a rescue that Churchill and Roosevelt tried hard to assure over the next 18 months.
After the defeat of France, Hermann Goering, Nazi air chief, announced, “The Fuhrer has ordered me to crush Britain with my Luftwaffe,” and he tried hard. Bombers attacked British coastal fortifications, airfields, and then in September 1940, began the terror bombing of London. The “Blitz,” as the British called it, eventually killed thousands of residents of Britain’s capital—6,000 in October alone. Edward R. Murrow, the voice of the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) based in London, gave Americans nightly reports that “London is burning.” The small British Air Force fought back. Churchill begged Roosevelt for more help. Roosevelt set about finding ways to provide it.
Moving Toward Lend-Lease Legislation
Every step that Roosevelt took brought hostility from neutrality advocates. Senior officers within the U.S. military worried that sending arms to Britain would undermine U.S. defenses. Secretary of War Henry H. Woodring was committed to a “fortress America” strategy, arming this country and ignoring the rest of the world. No one opposed Roosevelt’s support for Britain more than Charles Lindbergh, a hero from his 1920s flight across the Atlantic. In October 1939, Lindbergh said, “An ocean is a formidable barrier, even for modern aircraft.” The U.S. ambassador in London, Joseph P. Kennedy, predicted that Britain would quickly fall.
654 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
NORWAY
FINLAND
Lake ) Ladoga
•
Leningrad
ATLANTIC OCEA N
SPAIN
SWEDEN
IRELAND
NORTH
recAT SEA
UH EAT DENMARK
BRITAIN
ESTONIA
Lake Peipus NETHERLANDS
London
Bordeaux
BALEARIC
ISLANDS
CORSICA
(VICHY)
SARDINIA
(IT.)
.5^ YUQOSLAW^z-t % RUMANIA
' (partitioned Belgrade?., Bucharest*.--
April 1941J	(	—S
A? SERBIA
.BULGAR,A
flt.H - A r s'- finfifl	r’'"
LUXEMBOURG FRANCE
•Paris (Occupied) GOVERNMENT > .	A GENERAL S
/ ;/ OF
A
POLANEf Lemberg ' •Budapest”'
HUNGARYj
Moscow
SOVIET UNION
e Kiev
UKRAINE
Sea of Azov
SEA
M £ D
LIBYA
fid
SICILY
CYPRUS.
Hl Axis states and annexed areas	$ E a
I I
Axis allies I I
Axis occupied I I
Sudetenland J‘ ,‘MVV”dr
MAP 23-1 Nazi Europe, 1941. This map shows the extent of Nazi control of Europe. When one adds Vichy France and its territory in North Africa, it is clear that Hitler basically controlled the continent between Great Britain and the Soviet Union (Russia).
EGYPT


M.

Republican leaders in Congress opposed any intervention, and they had a lot of public support. In July 1940, students at Yale University, supported by Midwestern business leaders, formed the America First Committee. Most America First supporters saw the new war as an extension of the last one, simply an intra-European battle for power and colonies. Some sympathized with the Nazis or hated Jews. Most distrusted Roosevelt.
Roosevelt argued with the isolationists in Congress, ignored his ambassador in London as someone who “has been an appeaser and always will be an appeaser, and thought Lindbergh was a Nazi. He promoted military officers who supported his efforts and sidelined others. In 1940, FDR replaced isolationist Secretary of War Woodring with longtime internationalist Republican Henry L. Stimson, who had been secretary of war in Taft’s administration and secretary of state for President Hoover. Roosevelt also added Frank Knox, another Republican internationalist, as secretary of foe navy.
America First Committee
Committee launched in 1940 that argued for American neutrality and for staying out of World War II.
Chapter 23 Living j
•rldatWar 655
23.1
destroyers-for-bases
An agreement between the United States and Great Britain to exchange obsolete navy destroyers for British bases.
arsenal of democracy
A phrase coined by Franklin Roosevelt for the materials needed by Britain in its fight with Nazi Germany.
four freedoms
Freedoms announced by President Roosevelt in December 1940 that became a rallying point for the causes the United States would fight for.
In the fall of 1940, FDR concluded a “destroyers-for-bases” deal, which circumvented congressional restrictions on selling ships to Britain by trading obsolete ships to Britain in exchange for 99-year leases on a string of British Navy bases. He pressured the navy to declare ships obsolete and defended the deal as a way to strengthen America’s defenses. However, he also worried that he had exceeded his constitutional authority, and his opponents worried even more.
As war raged in Europe, the November 1940 presidential election loomed. Roosevelt broke precedent going back to George Washington and sought a third term. The Democrats, after some grumbling, mostly by supporters of Vice President John Garner, nominated Roosevelt. The Republicans, wanting to avoid having an isolationist candidate, nominated a corporate attorney and utility company executive, Wendell Willkie, an ardent opponent of the New Deal who did not disagree with Roosevelt greatly on foreign policy, though he did denounce the destroyers-for-bases deal as “the most arbitrary and dictatorial action ever taken by any president.”
In the middle of the campaign, Roosevelt asked Congress to institute a military draft so the country could have a trained army ready in case of war. Many opposed the draft, but when a reporter told Willkie that, “if you want to win the election you will come out against the proposed draft,” Willkie responded, “I would rather not win the election than do that.” The draft became law on September 16 and, with Willkie’s stance and the appointment of Stimson and Knox to the cabinet, the issue of isolationism was neutralized until late in the campaign.
Just before the election, polls showed that a majority of prospective voters preferred Willkie unless war was coming, in which case they wanted Roosevelt’s steady hand. On Election Day, they chose the steady hand, and FDR won a third term.
Only a month after the election, Roosevelt received an urgent message from Churchill spelling out just how desperate things were for Britain and making clear that “the moment approaches when we shall no longer be able to pay cash for shipping and other supplies.” In a fireside chat just after Christmas in 1940, Roosevelt said, “If Great Britain goes down.. .all the Americas, would be living at the point of a gun.” The only alternative, he told his radio audience, “We must be the great arsenal of democracy.” A week later, FDR proposed Lend-Lease legislation which would “loan” war materials to the British for the duration of the war. The president insisted, “We cannot, and we will not, tell them that they must surrender, merely because of present inability to pay for the weapons which we know they must have.”
In the same speech, Roosevelt also described larger purposes for American action which was, he said, to secure four freedoms:
The first is freedom of speech and expression....
The second is freedom of every person to worship God in his own way....
The third is freedom from want....
The fourth is freedom from fear....
Lend-Lease Act
Legislation passed in 1941 for a program through which the United States "loaned" military equipment to Britain and other World War II allies for the duration of the war.
Roosevelt’s “four freedoms” were very popular. Lend-Lease was much less popular. Isolationists like Montana Senator Burton Wheeler said that the plan “will plough under every fourth American boy.” Newspapers like the Chicago Tribune, the New York Daily News, and the Washington Times-Herald all editorialized against the plan. Nevertheless, the Congress that had passed so many neutrality acts in the 1930s approved the Lend-Lease Act by a 60 to 31 vote in the Senate and a 317 to 71 vote in the House. Britain would get the aid that Churchill wanted.
The military preparation in 1940 and 1941 ended the Great Depression. Spending $7 billion on Lend-Lease efforts and an additional $13.7 billion on the expansion of the U.S. military (up from $2.2 billion in 1940) provided a huge stimulus to the economy, far larger than any stimulus tried during the New Deal. Nearly a million young men were drafted by early 1941, and new jobs opened everywhere, virtually ending unemployment. New or redesigned federal agencies brought business leaders into the government to manage the huge conversion to a war-oriented economy (see Figure 23-1).
656 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
250
FIGURE 23-1 After 1940, the nation's unemployment rate went from almost 15 percent to fewer than 2 percent for most of the war while gross national product more than doubled from $100 billion to $200 billion.
While the United States geared up to serve as the “arsenal of democracy,” Hitler suddenly attacked his erstwhile ally Russia in June 1941. While there was no love lost in the United States for Communist Russia, most Americans knew that if the Nazis defeated Russia it would mean disaster. Missouri Senator Harry S. Truman said he would not mind it if both sides lost, but he also said, “I don’t want to see Hitler victorious under any circumstances.” The United States extended Lend-Lease aid to the Russians.
Lend-Lease aid to Britain brought the United States close to war with Germany. German U-boats sank ships carrying goods to Britain at five times the rate that new ships could be built. The United States began patrolling the western Atlantic, guarding ships as far as Greenland before turning them over to the British Navy for escort to Britain.
In August, Roosevelt and Churchill met in Newfoundland, planned ways to work together, and issued the Atlantic Charter that included a somewhat vague commitment to national self-determination for other countries, nonaggression, and “the establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security”—planting the seeds of what became the United Nations. Meanwhile, patrolling U.S. Navy ships ran into conflict with German submarines. In October 1941, a U-boat attacked the U.S. destroyer Kearny, killing 11 sailors, the first U.S. casualties of the war. Roosevelt said, “America has been attacked.” Later that month, a submarine sank the USS Reuben James, killing 115 sailors. War did not seem far off
Growing Tensions with Japan
While the United States focused on Europe, tensions were also building in the Pacific. The United States wanted to avoid a “two-ocean war,’ and sought peace with Japan. However, a combination of stubborn—if inadequate— support for China and a lack of careful attention did not make for an effective foreign policy. The Roosevelt administration provided modest Lend-Lease support for Chiang Kai-sheks government and allowed individual U.S. pilots to join the Flying Tigers, a volunteer air corps organized by Colonel Claire Chennault to fight for China, but continued to allow the metal and oil exports on which Japan depended.
657
Chapter 23 Living in a World at
A new generation of younger Japanese leaders, especially the war minister Hideki Tojo, wanted to ensure national glory and signed a formal alliance with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy. Nazi puppet governments in France and Holland gave Japan badly needed access to rice, rubber, and most important, oil from Dutch and French colonies in Asia. Japan launched the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere to free Asia from the colonial powers and to consolidate Japanese control. When Japan landed troops in French Indochina in July 1940, the United States finally cut off metal and aviation gasoline shipments, but not oil, which they saw as the last bargaining chip. As 1941 began, Japan sent a new ambassador to the United States, Kichisaburo Nomura. Nomura and U.S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull sought a way to reduce hostilities but failed. By midsummer, hard liners in Japan had won the support of Emperor Hirohito.
In October, Tojo replaced the moderate Fumimaro Konoye as Prime Minister of Japan. The new government was determined to go to war. The United States had broken the secret Japanese code and knew that war was coming. But they did not know where—perhaps an attack on American bases in the Philippines or on the British colonies in Asia, both of which were warned to prepare for attack. In fact, the Japanese military sent a huge fleet 4,000 miles across the Pacific to attack the United States itself at Pearl Harbor.
Japanese Admiral Takijiro Onishi warned that a direct attack on U.S. soil would make the Americans “insanely mad.” He said that while Japan would have the advantage in a short war, in a longer war, the U.S. industrial capacity and its large supply of oil—the fuel of modern war—meant that Japan would have a very hard time of it. But Japan’s leaders were confident of a quick victory.
When Japan did attack on December 7, the location was a greater surprise than the fact of the attack itself. But Japan’s attack on Hawaii solidified American public opinion. Even the staunchest opponents of preparedness, including Charles Lindbergh, now supported going to war.
Quick Review How did the United States move from an isolationist stance to one supporting the war effort? How did the attitudes of the government and the people differ?
23.2
MASS MOBILIZATION IN A SOCIETY AT WAR_________________________________
Analyze the war's impact on widely diverse groups of Americans who fought, supported the war effort at home, or otherwise lived through the war years.
For the people of the United States, the attack of December 7, 1941, changed everything. Before the war ended in 1945, 16 million Americans served in the armed forces, and 405,399 died in combat. All Americans had their lives changed by the war. At the beginning of the war, half of white Americans and 90 percent of black Americans lived in poverty. The war provided a job for everyone, and wartime jobs vastly expanded the size of the nation’s middle class. Americans moved around a lot during the war. The military brought rural and urban Americans together in units that faced the same fears and hopes. Far less often, it brought people of different races together since the military of World War II remained segregated not only by race but also by gender. As the war progressed, the Great Depression became a distant memory. New prosperity and new knowledge, but also the terrible losses of a major war and new fear about distant parts of the world became central to people’s lives.
Earl>'Ba,,,es' Early Losses' 1941-1942
,he Spri"S °f 1M1- ’ S“r"	Washington between British and
proclaimed a hero, the navy continued to limit	American officials (known by the code name ABC-1 or American-British Conversation
African-Americans to non-combat roles through-	Number 1) resulted in an agreement that, in the event of a two-front war, which
out the war.	everyone hoped to avoid, the United States would focus first on joining Britain to
58 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
defeat Germany. As U.S. Army Chief George C. Marshall explained, “Collapse in the Atlantic would be fatal; collapse in the Far East would be serious but not fatal.”
Within hours of the December 7 attack on Pearl Harbor, Japan also attacked U.S. bases in the Philippine Islands, the Aleutian Islands off Alaska, as well as Guam and Wake Islands in the mid-Pacific. Within days, Japanese pilots and troops were in the British colonies of Malaysia and Burma, French Indochina, the Dutch East Indies, and independent Thailand. To some, the Japanese were liberators, freeing them from the hated European and American colonial authorities. The Japanese had been preparing well and were a superb fighting force. British Hong Kong and American Guam and Wake Islands surrendered within a week. In February 1942, Singapore surrendered to the Japanese with 85,000 crack British troops now prisoners of war. American and British Navy forces lost the battle of Java Sea and the Dutch East Indies, and their rich oil fields fell to Japan.
In April and May of 1942, after holding out for months against impossible odds, the last U.S. troops on the islands of Bataan and Corregidor in the Philippines surrendered. Ben Steele, a young rancher from Montana who had volunteered for service, remembered that during the 99-day defense of Bataan, the Americans constantly faced starvation. After news spread that the commander in the Philippines, General Douglas MacArthur, had left for Australia, Steele and the others knew that “Only two things can happen to us now, we’re going to be dead or we’re going to be prisoners of war.”
After surrendering, the American and Filipino troops from Bataan were forced to march 66 miles to a railroad junction where they were transported to prison camps. Ihe march came to be known as the Bataan Death March. The Japanese captors, overwhelmed by the numbers, had been taught to hate American devils. If a prisoner fell, he was kicked, and if he did not move, killed with a bayonet. If prisoners, desperately thirsty in the hot sun, moved off the line to get water, they were shot. The surviving defenders of Bataan and Corregidor spent more than 3 years as Japanese prisoners. By the middle of 1942, Japan controlled the western Pacific from the far north to Australia, which remained in British hands.
Three days after the United States declared war on Japan, Hitler and Mussolini declared war on the United States. It was an odd move on their part. Germany, Italy, and Japan were allies—based on treaties they had signed with each other in 1936 and 1937—but if Germany and Italy had held back in declaring war on the United States, FDR would have been under great pressure to focus the war only on Japan, leaving Britain still isolated. German and Italian declarations of war allowed FDR to keep the focus on the Atlantic, which he believed was essential. The three nations at war with the United States—Germany, Italy, and Japan—were known as the Axis as opposed to the allied forces of the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union, joined by exiled French troops who called themselves the Free French and forces from China and a number of other nations that allied with them.
Even though the primary American focus was on Europe, U.S. and British forces won a partial victory in the Pacific in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May 1942 when they stopped a Japanese advance to Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. Then in June 1942, the Japanese attacked U.S. forces on Midway Island. But U.S. intelligence officers broke the Japanese code and knew that the attack was coming. In addition, U.S. pilots were learning new maneuvers that allowed direct attacks on Japanese ships. The Japanese force that was supposed to take the island lost four of its six aircraft carriers and all of its planes and pilots. U.S. forces also captured a Japanese Zero airplane, then the most modern in the war, and used it to build the U.S. Navy s new Hellcat plane, which could out-maneuver the Zero. The Hellcats began arriving in the Pacific in 1943.
Despite the successes, winning the war in 1942 was far from a sure thing. Germany and Japan both had very strong hands. German submarine commander Karl Donitz began sinking coastal shipping vessels in January 1942. New York
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War
23.1
23.2
Selective Service System
Federal agency that coordinated military conscription (the draft) beginning in World War II.
and other coastal cities refused to turn their lights off, and the submarines used the bright city lights to target shipping. In 3 months, the Germans sunk 216 ships, half of them tankers with essential oil for Britain. Burned out ships littered the American beaches.
In the summer of 1942, German forces were besieging the Soviet Union while their planes bombed Britain. The German submarine fleet shifted from the U.S. coast to Atlantic convoys, hitting them especially hard in midocean where little help was possible. In July 1942, a convoy of 34 Allied ships headed for the Russian ports of Murmansk and Archangel was attacked in the Norwegian Sea, and 23 of the 34 ships were sunk. German Admiral Donitz was confident and the Americans, British, and Russians fearful—that the Allied forces simply could not continue in the face of such losses.
Japan controlled the whole of the western Pacific (see Map 23-2). In August 1942, U.S. forces invaded the tactically important island of Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands and renamed its airfield Henderson Field. A counter invasion from Japan came close to success. The reporter John Hersey, staying with the troops on the island, told readers:
The uniforms, the bravado, the air of wearing a knife in the teeth—these were just camouflage. The truth was all over their faces. These were just American boys. They did not want that valley or any part of its jungle. They were ex-grocery clerks, ex-highway laborers, ex-bank clerks, ex-schoolboys.... [T]hey had joined the Marines to see the world, or to get away from a guilt, or most likely to escape the draft, not knowingly to kill or be killed.
But there they were. With navy support, the Marines on Guadalcanal held their position. The Japanese forces were beaten back until, in February 1943, in a move they seldom made during the war, the Japanese abandoned Guadalcanal.
Men in the Military—Volunteers and Draftees
As the war began, young men quickly found themselves in uniform. Sixteen million men had registered for the draft when the war began, more soon after, and others volunteered in anticipation of an expanding draft. The draft was administered by the Selective Service System through 6,443 local draft boards that decided who was eligible for various deferments—for married men, for those with children, for those in crucial war work—that were granted less and less often.
Lloyd Kilmer began life on a dairy farm but was working as a bellhop at a hotel in Rochester, Minnesota, when he heard the news of Pearl Harbor. Six months later, Kilmer enlisted in the Army Air Corps and flew combat missions over Europe until he was shot down in June 1944. U.S. troops liberated his prisoner of war camp in April 1945. Growing up in the immigrant neighborhood of East Boston, Massachusetts, during the Depression, Al Fossett ascribed his success on the high school track team to pretending that he was running after something to eat. When war came, he was stationed in British India where he served as a gunner on planes that flew supplies from India to beleaguered Chinese forces. Woodrow W. Crockett was born in Texarkana, Arkansas, and joined the army as a private in 1940. In 1942, he was assigned to the Tuskegee airmen, an African-American unit that achieved considerable distinction in World War II. He flew 149 combat missions during the U.S. invasion of Italy and received the Distinguished Flying Cross.
Most of those who served were white males like Kilmer and Fossett. The Great Depression shaped their childhood, and they liked the food and security of the army even when they were frightened. Only a minority were enthusiastic about serving while most were willing to do a job they believed needed to be done. In the process, they met a greater diversity of people than any previous generation of Americans and saw more of the world and its people.
660 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
SOVIET
n r
500	1,000 Kilometers
MAP 23-2 Japanese Power in the Pacific. In the early months of World War II, Japan extended its reach through much more of the Pacific region from the Aleutian Islands off Alaska to Borneo and New Guinea in the South Pacific.

Guadalcanal Aug. 1942-Feb. 1943	\ j NEW \ X HEBRIDES »(Br. and Fr.)	z
		FIJI
	Xc	(Br.)
CORAL NEW CALEDONIA
M SEA
(Br.) U.S. air strikes Major battles Allied advances Allied air offenses
Japanese territory at surrender
Farthest extent of Japanese control, 1942 I	| Allied nations
I	l Neutral nations
Limit of Japanese control | after Pearl Harbor
Deferments, Alternative Service, and War Work
Not everyone served in the military. The Selective Service allowed local draft boards considerable discretion. Throughout most of the South, draft boards, which were nearly all white, showed a deep aversion to putting black men in uniform and giving them guns, with the result that they had to dip much deeper into the pool of white men, offering whites few deferments. Congress allowed young men to complete college so that, as one draft board member reported, “fathers in their middle thirties were being inducted from their stores, garages, and other businesses,” while they saw younger single men sitting in classrooms. A November 1942 law, the Tydings Amendment, exempted agricultural workers from the draft. Men in key war industries and some who would not fight for religious reasons were also sometimes exempted.
Other Americans found themselves in new jobs they had never before imagined. Charles Briscoe’s family left the Dust Bowl for California where he learned sheet metal work. In 1940, he took a job at Boeing Aircraft in Wichita, Kansas, building the supersecret B-29 long range bomber. Briscoe remembered, “We knew the B-017s and B-24s didn’t have the range to get to Japan. We had to have the B-29 to win the war and get the men home from over there.” At 14, Ed Powers was too young for the military, but
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War
21J I
i
.........t
23.2
111 3
1
1
21,& \
he joined his father—who was too old to serve—in patrolling their hometown to be sure that everyone was honoring the blackout to avoid a German bombing.
Joseph Bullock was among the 43,000 conscientious objectors who in the words of Selective Service regulations “by reason of religious training and belief, is conscientiously opposed to participation in war in any form.” The largest number of COs, as they were called, some 25,000 served as noncombatants in the military, providing first aid to troops under extraordinarily dangerous conditions or behind-the-lines logistical support. Those who for religious reasons could not support the war effort in any form were allowed to work in civilian public service. Bullock and the 12,000 CPS men worked on forestry projects planting trees and building roads, or staffing mental hospitals. They received no pay, had to cover their own expenses, and did not receive veteran benefits at the end of the war. A final group of some 6,000 refused out of conscience to have anything to do with the Selective Service System, and these men were sent to federal prison. Some of them, like David Dellinger, became lifelong antiwar activists. In some areas, COs were treated with respect; in others, they met deep hostility. Harry Van Dyck remembered being told, “You goddamn COs should all be shot.” After the war, Bullock was told that he could not teach Sunday School because his wartime service made him an inappropriate role model for Christian children.
When 40 percent of the 21-year-olds who signed up for the first draft registration in late 1940 then got married, General Hershey announced that he would consider that recent marriages “might have been for the purpose of evading the draft.” When the draft was expanded to include married men, most fathers were still exempted, leading one young couple to name their new child “Weatherstrip” because he kept his father out of the draft. However, as the need grew, fathers were also drafted, and by 1945, nearly a million fathers were in the service.
Women in Military Service
Early in the war there was some talk of conscripting women, if not for the military then for wartime industrial work. In the end, however, the United States, unlike Great Britain or the Soviet Union, left it up to individual women to decide whether they wanted to serve.
Each of the branches of the military enlisted women in special noncombat units that freed men for combat: the U.S. Army established the Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps, or WAACs (later the Auxiliary was dropped, and they became the WACs); the
Young women begin their service as WACs during World War II. 662 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
U.S.
Navy created the Women Accepted for Voluntary Emergency Service, or WAVES, the Army Air Corps set up the Women’s Auxiliary Service Pilots, or WASPS, the Coast Guard launched the Women’s Reserve of the Coast Guard, nicknamed the SPARS; and the Marines organized an unnamed women’s branch. Some 350,000 women (compared with over 15 million men) served in uniform during World War II. Claudine Scottie” Scott remembered her freshman year at the University of Kansas in the fall of 1940 as “a fun and exciting time,” but by the following year, the world had become a much more serious place. Scott volunteered for the WAVES and was assigned to the Joint Chiefs of Staff to deliver the “log of fighting going on all over the world” to the White House every day. She was at the White House and saw President Roosevelt on the day of the allied invasion of Europe in 1944, but her focus was on the fate of her boyfriend who was part of the invading force. He was wounded but returned home, and they were married in the Veterans Hospital in Richmond, Virginia. Martha Settle grew up in Norristown, Pennsylvania. As an African-American, she experienced racism within the War Manpower Commission. She applied, and was selected by Mary McLeod Bethune, for one of the few officer slots allowed to African-American WACs. Margaret Ray grew up in Indiana and was recruited into a small elite unit of WASPs within the Army Air Force that handled domestic military flying so men could be freed up to fly overseas. “Here I was, this farm girl,” Ray remembered, “and it was so exciting.” Mary Louise Roberts became a nurse with the army. She commanded a field operating room for troops during the landings in Casablanca, North Africa, in 1943 and on Anzio beach in Italy in 1944.
Rosie the Riveter and Her Friends
Just before the attack on Pearl Harbor, 12 million women in the United States held jobs—a dramatic increase from the depths of the Depression. Middle-class white women tended to be teachers, nurses, social workers, or secretaries. In
the course of the war, more than 6 million more women entered the workforce. Some 2 million women went to work in previously all-male defense plants where they sometimes made up half of the workforce.
Women also constituted a quarter of the workers in the converted auto industry that was producing tanks and trucks. On the West Coast,
500,000 women worked in the aircraft industry and 225,000 in shipbuilding. They made more money than most women had ever made.
They took on hard jobs that before the war people thought only men could handle or from which tradition, law, and all-male unions had excluded them. But even during wartime, women were often relegated to the lower rungs of the industrial order while men took on the highest-skilled, highest-paying jobs. Drilling rivets was high-skill and high-pay work, and in spite of the “Rosie the Riveter name and public relations posters, far more women worked in routine production jobs.
Women working in industrial plants had to develop a new fashion style that provided room for safe movement, including pants, which made movement much easier than a skirt, and short hair, which was essential around dangerous machinery. In addition, they had to develop a tough attitude in the face of catcalls and wolf whistles.
Delana Jensen made 155-millimeter howitzers for the army. She was hired when the plant was still not sure whether women could handle the work, but within months, she was training men. It was exacting work and “had to be perfect.. .within 1/1,000th of an inch. She liked the denim coveralls and remembered, “We were living in a special time and place. There was an energy in the air and in the people. We were wanted and needed and important to the war effort.

i






Women working at the Douglas Aircraft Plant in Long Beach, Californj| Gender diversity was common as women often constituted half of tl| labor force in the industrial plants. Racial diversity was less common!
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War

IU
American Voices
Kathy O’Grady, “What Did You Do in the War, Grandma?”
f'n 1995 Kathy O'Grady interviewed her grandmother Katherine O'Grady who remembered the war as a time when women wanted to work in war-related industries. The pay was much better than in other jobs, and being of service to the nation mattered, as did a new found sense of freedom. Many, like O'Grady, looked back on their prewar lives as a time when they were much more naive than they were later on.
In 1939 I lived in East Providence [Rhode Island]...I worked at
Gibson's, a soda fountain at the bus stop on Westminster Street. I was very busy. Servicemen from all over used to come in. I made $15 for a 48-hour week. I bought my own clothes, paid my own expenses, car-fare, whatever I wanted, and I'd go to the movies. If you had a five dollar bill then you were very wealthy.
I met my husband while I was working at Gibson's. He had a construction job building an air base up in Newfoundland. When Pearl Harbor broke out, he came back home and we got married. All the fellows had gone into the service. His brothers were all gone. All the men were leaving. My husband had a deferment because his job was considered important to the defense, and we had a 9-month old son. But he wanted to go so badly that he quit the job....He was shipped out to Okinawa. He was a Seabee and worked in the construction battalion which builds bases. The Seabees would go ahead of the Marines to make the landing and do all that. He went from one island to the other across the Pacific....
After my husband went into the Seabee's I quit my job at Gibson's and went to work in a woolen mill, Lister's, which before the war was just a normal routine job. When the war started they needed wool very badly so this was considered a service job. In other words, it was important. At the mill the government used to send out all the Purple Heart soldiers to talk to us and tell us that we couldn't take time off, and pushed all this patriotism on us....I think I got $27 a week, so it did pay more. The soldiers needed woolen blankets. At the time all servicemen were issued their clothing, their blanket, their bedroll, the whole bit. The blankets that came home after war had traveled all over the world... .We were very proud of [our work], because it meant that we were doing our part....
After the war things changed because women found out they could go out and they could survive. They could really do it on their own. That's where I think women's lib really started.
Source: An Oral History of Rhode Island Women during World War II, downloaded from www.stg.brown.edu/projects/WWII_Women/July 30, 2012
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
In what ways did the war change Katherine O'Grady's life?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What clues does the document provide about the long-term impact of the war on the place of women in American society?
Marginalization in a Democracy—The March on Washington and the War at Home
In 1940, African-Americans and Latinos continued to be excluded from the new prosperity. Three out of four African-Americans still lived in the rural South, the majority still sharecroppers. Most Latinos lived in poverty in the urban or rural Southwest. Even those who had moved from farms to small towns or cities saw themselves passed over as wartime production picked up.
In 1940, the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, perhaps the most powerful black-led organization in the United States, asked the government to avoid discrimination in the expanding armed forces. After A. Philip Randolph, long-time president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and Walter White, the executive secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), met with President Roosevelt later that year, they believed they had a friend in the federal government, especially given Eleanor Roosevelt’s commitment to civil rights.
The rapidly expanding war industries were less friendly. When the president of North American Aviation announced, “We will not employ Negroes,” he spoke for many whites in management and on the shop floors of the companies. Then, in late 1940, the War Department announced its policy “not to intermingle colored and white enlisted personnel in the same regimental organization.” Randolph felt betrayed, and he meant to do something about it.
664 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Randolph proposed a massive march on Washington, initially thinking that 10,000 blacks would come to Washington, DC, to demand that the government protect their economic rights. As word spread, Randolph raised the number to 50,000 and then to 100,000. He insisted that this event would be an all-black march. “There are some things Negroes must do alone,” he said. The march was called for July 1, 1941.
As it became clear that the march might be a powerful and embarrassing event, many people within the administration began to panic. They challenged Randolph’s patriotism How could he do such a thing with war imminent? What will they think in Berlin? Randolph s response was, Oh, perhaps no more than they already think of America s racial policy. Friends within the administration tried to persuade Randolph to postpone the march, but he persisted. The only grounds on which the march could be called off, he said, would be a government order “with teeth in it” that would truly protect the economic rights of African-Americans in the new industries. Randolph won.
On June 25, 1941, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8802 “to provide for the full and equitable participation of all workers in defense industries, without discrimination because of race, creed, color, or national origin.” The order created the Fair Employment Practices Committee (later Commission) to enforce the policy. It was the order “with teeth in it.” The march was called off. Some called Executive Order 8802 an economic Emancipation Proclamation. Executive Order 8802 was enforced unevenly but sufficiently enough to make a real difference. Sybil Lewis was a maid in Oklahoma being paid $3.50 a week before the war. She was hired at Lockheed Aircraft in Los Angeles at $48 per week. She was paired with a white woman from Arkansas, and though they certainly had their differences, Lewis remembered that they learned, “to relate to each other in ways that we never experienced before.” Not all encounters were as positive.
White workers went on strike at a Western Electric factory in Baltimore, Maryland, demanding segregated restrooms. In a factory in Mobile, Alabama, shipyard workers rioted over the promotion of a black welder. Riots also took place in Detroit and New York City in 1943. Twenty-five blacks and nine whites were killed in a June riot in Detroit, and six blacks were killed in another riot in New York’s Harlem. As news of these clashes spread, army bases around the world also exploded as segregated white and black units clashed in England and in the United States.
Latinos also faced exclusion and violence. The most obvious symbol of Mexican American resistance to white culture were gangs known as pachucos, or zoot suiters, for the exaggerated clothing— a long suit coat with baggy pants that came in at the ankles—that symbolized their defiance of social norms. During wartime frugality when most people were channeling money and resources toward the war effort, the zoot suits also seemed an unpatriotic extravagance. In June 1943, white servicemen in various boot camps in the Los Angeles area took out much of their own frustration by attacking the nearby Latino population, especially the zoot suiters. Police, for the most part, looked the other way. The zoot suit riots spread elsewhere until FDR intervened to stop the violence, mostly because he had been courting Mexico as a wartime ally.
In spite of riots and discrimination, and they were very real, World War II also gave African-Americans, Latinos, and American Indians new opportunities. Because of the wartime labor shortages and federal enforcement efforts, many who had previously been excluded got jobs in industries previously closed to them. Others became more politically active, and more would do so once the war ended.
Fair Employment Practices Committee
Federal agency established in 1941 to curb racial discrimination in war production jobs and government employment.
zoot suit riots
Race riots in June 1943, primarily centered in Los Angeles, in which American military personnel attacked Latinos.
23.1
23.2
233
234
Japanese Internment
In an era when many Americans sacrificed much, including their lives, other Americans, especially Japanese Americans, saw their most basic freedoms undermined by wartime hysteria. The immigration legislation of 1924 had prohibited immigration from Japan. As a result, the Japanese population in the mainland United States comprised some
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War
While some Latinos faced hostile rioters in places like Los Angeles, others, like these Mexican-American soldiers, served in the U.S. military and believed that the war was the beginning of their successful civil rights movement.
120,000 people of Japanese descent split between some 40,000 Issei, or first-generation immigrants who had arrived before 1924 and were by law “aliens ineligible for citizenship,” and twice as many younger Nisei, or American-born Japanese who were American citizens. A majority of the Issei were over the age of 50 by 1941, while many Nisei were under 18 and largely quite Americanized. The small Japanese Issei and Nisei community had remained relatively isolated. Most supported themselves by small truck farms or nurseries providing fruits, vegetables, and garden supplies all along the Pacific coast.
In the immediate aftermath of the Pearl Harbor attack, there was little overt hostility toward Japanese Americans. The usually conservative Los Angeles Times editorialized that the Japanese were “good Americans, born and educated as such.” Speaking of the Nisei, General John L. DeWitt, head of the U.S. Army on the West Coast said, “An American citizen, after all, is an American citizen.” In addition, U.S. Attorney General Francis Biddle wrote that he was determined “to avoid mass internment and the persecution of aliens that had characterized the First World War.” All would quickly change their minds.
While there were 120,000 people of Japanese ancestry living on the U.S. mainland in 1941, there were 200,000 Japanese living in Hawaii, almost half of the population of the islands. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, the federal government declared a state of martial law and suspended basic rights in Hawaii. Several hundred Japanese were arrested as suspected spies and saboteurs. But the entire economy of Hawaii would have collapsed if the Japanese community had been interned, and there would have been no place to put them and no one to guard them.
The situation for the Japanese on the West Coast was very different. Their treatment dramatically contrasted not only the situation in Hawaii but also the way that German and Italian communities in the United States were treated. Unlike during World War I, the German and Italian communities were not subjected to mass discrimination during World War II. There were arrests of individuals suspected of activities supporting the country’s enemies, and given the strength of the Nazi movement within the United States prior to the war, there were individuals that the government had reason to watch. All noncitizens from Germany and Italy were labeled “enemy aliens” when the war began, but FDR ordered the Attorney General to cancel the designation in the fall of 1942—just before Election Day.
When some accused Japanese Americans of spying, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover said that such charges were utterly without foundation. Nevertheless, leaders of the California Grower-Shipper Vegetable Association, representing large-scale agriculture, did not like the competition of the small Japanese American truck farms, and one association leader declared, “We might as well be ho nest.... It’s a question of whether the white man lives on the Pacific Coast or the brown man.” Respected journalists, including Walter Lippmann and Westbrook Pegler, pushed for removal. Pegler wrote, “The Japanese in California should be under armed guard to the last man and woman right now, and to hell with habeas corpus until the danger is over.” And by early 1942, General DeWitt, who had first said “An American citizen is an American citizen,” was saying “The Japanese race is an enemy race and.. .the racial strains are undiluted.” A few, very few, white voices, like the tiny Committee on American Principles and Fair Play, defended the rights of Japanese Americans. With public opinion running 666 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945


Photographer Dorothea Lange, who had taken iconic images during the Great Depression, captured the pride and tragedy of this Japanese family waiting to be taken from their homes to a relocation center.
so strongly in favor of removal, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066 on February 19, 1942, ordering the War Department to create “military areas...from which any and all persons may be excluded.” The order did not specify which areas or which persons were to be excluded, but the result was that people of Japanese ancestry were ordered out of most of the three West Coast states.
Initially, Japanese Issei and Nisei in America were allowed to move to the Midwest or the East. The rest of the country, like Hawaii, was not covered by the internment order. Some 15,000 people voluntarily moved before General DeWitt ordered an end to such moves in late March. After that, people of Japanese ancestry were ordered to report to “assembly centers,” including the Santa Anita racetrack in Southern California and the Tanforan Racetrack in San Bruno near San Francisco.
Yamato Ichihashi, a Stanford professor, described Santa Anita as “mentally and morally depressive.” Families who had lived in their own homes, managed their own businesses, in some cases like Ichihashi had been involved in rich professional lives, were suddenly in armed camps, living in stables that had recently held horses, and kept behind barbed wire under the watch of armed guards. The instructions were to bring only what they could carry—no pets and no cameras.
Forced out of their homes and into the temporary relocation centers, some 100,000 Issei and Nisei were then moved a second time to 10 relocation camps scattered through sparsely inhabited regions of the West. The first to open was at Manzanar on a dried up lake bed between the coastal mountains and the higher Sierra Nevada range. In this desert location, summer temperatures were often above 100 degrees while the winter was freezing. Each family had a 20 by 20 foot uninsulated cabin.
For most of the internees, the next 3 years were a time of enforced idleness while the rest of the country worked harder than ever. Some young men volunteered to join the all-Japanese units fighting in Europe and served with distinction while their families waited for them in the camps. Other young men, offended at being asked to foreswear allegiance to an emperor they had never cared about, refused any form of service and were held as virtual prisoners at Tule Lake, California.
Some of the Japanese community challenged the process of internment. Gordon Hirabayashi remembered hearing of the order to report to the camps and thinking, T was confronted with a dilemma: Do I stay out of trouble and succumb to the status of second-class citizen, or do I continue to live like other Americans and thus disobey the law?” He disobeyed the law and challenged it in court. In its first ruling on the legality of internment, the U.S. Supreme Court threw out Hirabayashi’s challenge and he served
Chapter 23 Living in a World at
I
Internment camps during World War II MAP 23-3 Internment Camps. Japanese internment camps were located in isolated areas in many parts of the United States.
Japanese internment
A federal government policy implemented by executive order through which Japanese Americans were forced to enter internment camps.
time in a prison camp. Although Justice Frank Murphy supported the court’s unanimous opinion in the case, he used the occasion to write that the Japanese internment was the first time in history that the federal government had “sustained a substantial restriction on the personal liberty of citizens of the United States based upon the accident of race or ancestry,” while noting the parallels with what Nazi Germany was doing to Jews.
A second set of cases known as Korematsu v. United States then began to move through the courts. In late 1944, after the presidential election and as Korematsu v. United States was about to be decided, the War Department declared that the original “military necessity” was now over and that those of Japanese ancestry were free to return to their homes. When the court announced its decision, it again sidestepped the specific issue, but as Hugo Black wrote in the majority decision, “All legal restrictions which curtail the civil rights of a single racial group are immediately suspect.” As those who had lived in the camps returned to the West Coast, they found that their homes and businesses were long gone and that they had been excluded from the prosperity of wartime America. While the losses of those interned were estimated at $400 million, Congress provided $37 million in reparations in 1948. Only decades later, Congress voted $20,000 for each surviving internee, and in 1998, President Bill Clinton awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Fred Korematsu.
Quick Review Which groups gained the most from the United States' involvement in World War II? Which groups on the home front were hurt by the war?
23.3
INDUSTRIAL STRENGTH, INDUSTRIAL PROSPERITY
Analyze U.S. industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on American society.
Americas wartime ally, Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin, understood the key role the United States would play in World War II. Even though the Soviet Union supplied far more soldiers (and suffered almost 20 times as many battlefield deaths), Stalin said, “Ihe most important things in this war are machines.... The United States... is a country of machines.” It was an accurate analysis.
668 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
A month after the United States entered the war, Roosevelt told Congress, “It will not be sufficient for us...to produce a slightly superior supply of munitions to that of Germany, Japan, and Italy. The president said the United States needed to provide “crushing superiority of equipment in any theater of the world war.” Roosevelt insisted that the United States produce 60,000 airplanes in 1942 and 125,000 more in 1943, plus 120,000 tanks, 55,000 antiaircraft guns, and 16 million tons of merchant shipping. Few thought it could be done, but the goals were met.
Wartime Production
Several factors led to the extraordinary U.S. output in the machinery of war in 1942 and 1943. Compared to the rest of the world, the United States was a manufacturing giant even in the 1930s, and the United States had huge supplies of iron ore, coal, and oil. In 1937, the United States produced 4.8 million automobiles while Germany produced 331,000 and Japan only 26,000. Moreover at that point in 1937, perhaps half of all U.S. manufacturing plants were idle and a very large part of the U.S. labor force was out of work. It would not take long, once the country put itself on a war footing, for the unemployed to go to work, the plants to start up, and those already in operation to shift from peace-time to war-focused production. The War Production Board, the government agency charged with ensuring that the country produced the war materials needed, quickly prohibited the manufacture of automobiles for private use and limited other civilian manufacturing after the nation went to war. On February 10, 1942, auto workers in Detroit held a little ceremony for the last cars coming down the line then began rebuilding the machinery to make tanks and trucks. Aircraft plants, especially the giant Boeing and Lockheed plants on the West Coast, and Fords Willow Run aircraft plant near Detroit started to turn out planes. Shipyards went to three shifts.
The United States also had an attitude toward manufacturing that greatly helped its success. German armaments minister Albert Speer told Hitler that he was worried because it was the Americans, not the Germans, who “knew how to act with organizationally simple methods and therefore achieved great results” while Germany was stuck with an “outmoded, tradition-bound, and arthritic organizational system.” At the beginning of the war, Germany made 425 different kinds of aircraft, 151 kinds of trucks, and 150 different motorcycles all to exacting precision standards. The Americans made far fewer models, accepted lower standards, and got things done—a high-volume output that far surpassed allies or enemies.
Perhaps the best example of American industrial productivity was the Liberty ship, the workhorse of the merchant marine that kept Britain, Russia, and later U.S. forces in the Pacific supplied throughout the war. The Liberty ships were all built to the same standard: 440 feet long with a cargo hold that could contain 330 freight cars, 440 tanks, or 3.4 million C-rations. When the first Liberty ship, the Patrick Henry, was christened on December 30, 1941, just after the Pearl Harbor attack, it had taken 355 days— just shy of a year—to build. Six months later, in June 1942, it took 105 days to build a Liberty ship, and in November 1942, working around the clock, workers built the Robert E. Peary in less than 5 days. One engineer called the Liberty ships the “Model T of the seas,” and President Roosevelt called them ugly ducklings, but they did the job.
Henry Kaiser created a huge new industrial facility in Richmond, on San Francisco Bay, where tens of thousands of workers of different races and from every part of the country, many of whom had never worked in any industry before, built these ships. The highly specific jobs of mass-produced ship building in which each worker repeated one small task over and over again took much less skill than had the jobs of elite shipbuilding workers in the past, but new workers loved the opportunities the yards provided, and the finished ships just kept coming.
The huge increase in American industrial activity was not without its problems. Early in 1942, the government took several steps to control inflation and costs. The Office of Price Administration announced a General Maximum Price Regulation in
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War
233
23.2
233
23J
April that made the prices of goods and services in March 1942 permanent. Known as “General Max,” the regulation did help control costs and inflation. The National War Labor Board negotiated a settlement between union and management at Bethlehem, Republic, Youngstown, and Inland Steel Companies that limited wage increases to cost of living. Known as the “Little Steel agreement (the U.S. Steel Company was “Big Steel”), the agreement became a norm throughout American industries. Although there had been several strikes in the months just before the war, most of organized labor took a “no strike pledge” for the duration of the war in return for a government policy that required industries to maintain labor contracts and union membership. Wartime Prosperity
In spite of restrictions on wage increases, more Americans were employed and earned more money than ever before in their lives or the nations history during World War II. Wartime rationing limited some goods. People needed ration stamps to purchase their monthly allotment of meat, coffee, tires, and gasoline, and new cars were simply not available. Housing was very hard to find, thus, many lived in cramped quarters, while extended families often moved in together. Nevertheless, Americans who could remember the Great Depression found themselves with previously undreamed-of opportunity. Laura Briggs, a young farm woman from Idaho, remembered, “We and most other farmers went from a tarpaper shack to a new frame house with indoor plumbing... [and] a hot water heater... .It was just so modern we couldn’t stand it.” A shipyard worker in Portsmouth, Virginia, said, “I felt like something had come down from heaven. I went from forty cents an hour to... two seventy-five an hour.... [T]he war completely turned my life around.” By December 1944, Macys department stores reported the highest volume of sales in their history.
National leaders worried about a combination of prosperity and complacency. One Pentagon officer said that Americans “have never been bombed... .They have little appreciation of the horrors of war.” In December 1943, FDR told his cabinet that he sometimes thought, “One of the best things that could happen, would be to have a few German bombs fall here to wake us up.” But other than isolated and utterly unsuccessful enemy efforts to fire on the Oregon coast and New York’s Long Island, the continental United States was never bombed or shot at, which was a dramatically different experience from that of Britain or Russia or, of course, Italy, Germany, and Japan. Letters home from those doing the fighting were censored, and even if they had not been, many soldiers did not want to discuss the horrors of war.
Sometimes complacency had a high cost. When two inmates escaped from Auschwitz and brought stories of the Holocaust to the United States, many simply refused to believe that such things were possible. In the summer of 1943, given detailed reports of the Nazi death camps, Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter simply responded, “I am unable to believe you.” It was simply too horrible to contemplate. The degree to which traditional anti-Semitism played a role in some people’s responses to the news about Nazi death camps, the degree to which people such as Frankfurter simply could not believe what they were hearing, and the extent to which other urgencies of the war led people to focus elsewhere has been debated ever since the war. For whatever reason—or probably many reasons—few Americans took the stories of the emerging Holocaust seriously until the end of the war demonstrated their awful truth.
Initially, the administration wanted to raise taxes to pay most of the war’s cost immediately, but in the end, taxes covered about 45 percent, while loans covered the rest. Nevertheless, taxes increased significantly during the war. The Revenue Act of 1942 raised $7 billion in new taxes. In 1939, only 4 million of the richest Americans paid income tax. The 1942 law brought 13 million new tax payers into the system. The government also began payroll tax withholding in 1943, requiring employers to deduct taxes and pay them directly to the government before issuing paychecks. The rapid increases in wages and job opportunities, coupled with continued appeals to patriotism, limited objections to the new and much higher levels of taxation.
670 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Ihe government also borrowed money. Low-cost Series E bonds were sold, allowing many Americans to save some of what they were earning and contribute to the war effort. Larger loans were also forthcoming. Commercial banks increased their holdings in U.S. government debt from $1 billion in 1941 to $24 billion in 1945 In spite of all the borrowing and spending, the United States emerged from the war as the one remaining economic powerhouse in the world as the economies of all the other economic leaders suffered much more from the war.
Quick Review How was the American experience during World War II different from that of people in Europe and Asia?
WINNING A WORLD WAR—NORTH AFRICA, EUROPE, ASIA, THE PACIFIC,
1943-1945 23.4
Explain the course of the war leading to victory in Europe and then the Pacific.
While many Americans prospered during World War II, for those in the military, especially those in combat, World War II was a combination of long waits, boredom, and occasional moments of sheer terror, pain, and heroism.
The War in Europe, 1943-1945
In late 1942, the Russians insisted that it was time for their western allies to open a second front and attack Germany and German-occupied France directly to take the pressure off of Russia. But Churchill, remembering the terrible British losses of World War I, would not agree. Instead, Britain and America kept bombing Germany, and allied troops landed at Oran, Algeria, in November 1942 to attack German forces in North Africa, a huge diversion as far as Stalin was concerned, but it was the beginning of some victories that lifted spirits among the Allies.
In January 1943, Roosevelt went to Casablanca in North Africa to meet with Churchill, becoming the first president since Wilson to travel outside of the Western Hemisphere and the first since Lincoln to visit U.S. troops in the field. They agreed on several things: that they would continue to bomb Germany; that after North Africa, they would invade Italy, not the coast of France; and that while the United States would continue to supply Britain and Russia, a third of new forces and supplies would go to the Pacific. At a press conference at the end of the meeting, FDR also said that the Allies would accept only unconditional surrender from Germany, Italy, and Japan; there would be no intermediate peace negotiations. Then, in February 1943, the Russian Army and the Russian winter defeated the Nazi troops at Stalingrad, and the tide of war began to change. The Russian Army—known as the Red Army, which had been retreating and defending, went on the offensive. The German Wehrmacht—the military machine that had been undefeated in Europe since 1939—started retreating.
In the summer of 1943, American and British units began the attack on what was known as “fortress Europe”—the Nazi-controlled territory at the heart of the continent. On July 10, 1943, U.S., Canadian, and British forces, having sent coded messages that lured the Germans and Italians into defensive positions on the northern part of the Sicily, instead landed on the south coast of the island. U.S. forces under General George Patton made rapid progress across the island taking Palermo on the north coast on July 22. The effort was bolstered by welcoming crowds who helped them and shouted “Down with Mussolini.” Italy’s King Victor Emmanuel III dismissed Mussolini and had him arrested, but German units in Italy continued to fight. Allied forces continued a long, slow, and bitter battle up the Italian peninsula, attacking Salerno in September 1943, sustaining a !°ng battle around Monte Cassino, making a fresh landing on the beaches at Anzio outside of Rome in January 1944, and finally taking control of Rome itself in June 1944.
23.1
~----------I
23.2
233
23.4
Chapter 23 Living in a Woj
671

World War II in Europe_____________
1811 Axis powers Bill Areas under Axis control, May 1941 BB Allied powers I I Neutral
Axis forces
Allied forces: U.S.S.R.
Allied forces: U.S. and British Major battles

MAP 23-4 The War in Europe. Early in the war, Nazi forces had attacked France and then the Soviet Union, but as the tide of war turned, Soviet forces moved across much of eastern Europe and into Germany itself while U.S. and British forces attacked Nazi forces in North Africa, Italy, and finally France and Germany.
672 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
While the Red Army rolled west from Russia into Poland and eventually Germany, and while American and British forces won battles in North Africa and Italy, American pilots joined their British counterparts in what became round-the-clock bombing of Germany. The British had begun bombing German military targets, first in France and then, as the planes got better, in the Ruhr Valley of Germany itself. Precision bombing in real wartime conditions was exceedingly difficult, so the British simply tried to destroy the morale of the German civilians, especially industrial workers, by bombing wherever they could what some called terror bombing. When the Americans joined the war, they initially found the terror bombing to be abhorrent, but they worked out a compromise: the British would bomb at night, bombing wherever they could, and the Americans, with more sophisticated equipment, could bomb specified targets during the day. The first U.S. bombers began their attacks in August 1942, and by January 1943, hundreds of U.S. bombers began penetrating German airspace, hitting industrial targets like the German city of Bremen. The losses of pilots and crews were staggering. Six hundred Americans were killed in the summer of 1943, 16 percent of those who flew missions. One pilot remembered his terror when being attacked by German Messerschmitt 109s:
The plane shook with the chatter of our guns... .As other planes were hit, we had to fly through their debris... .When a plane blew up, we saw their parts all over the sky. We smashed into some of the pieces. One plane hit a body which tumbled out of a plane ahead. A crewman went out the front hatch of a plane and hit the tail assembly of his own plane. No chute. His body turned over and over like a bean bag tossed into air.
And still the crews kept flying.
In November 1943, President Roosevelt left the United States for a second time, flying to Cairo, Egypt, for a third meeting with Prime Minister Churchill and then on to Tehran, Iran, for his first meeting with Stalin, which Churchill and the nominal Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek also attended. FDR was intrigued to meet Stalin in person. At Cairo, FDR also tried to persuade Churchill that Britain must renounce its colonies in India, Burma, Malaya, and Hong Kong and promise them independence after the war as the United States was doing with the Philippine Islands. Churchill was a great wartime leader in Britain, but he was equally a lifelong British imperialist, and he was not about to be persuaded.
The Tehran Conference included discussions of the war in China. In addition, Stalin kept up the pressure for the United States and Britain to invade France as quickly as possible and promised to join the war against Japan once the war in Europe was won. The conference was also a test of the personal chemistry between Stalin and FDR. Although the U.S. president was confident of his own skill in persuading people, he confessed, “I couldn’t get any personal connection with Stalin.” U.S. Ambassador to Russia Averell Harriman described Stalin as someone of “high intelligence,” with a “fantastic grasp of detail” and “shrewdness.” Stalin, Harriman said, was “better informed than Roosevelt, more realistic than Churchill, in some ways the most effective of the war leaders. At the same time he was, of course, a murderous tyrant.” Stalin wanted an absolute promise that the United States and Britain would start the invasion of Germany—code named Operation Overlord—in the spring of 1944. And he wanted to make sure that others knew, as he had told Josef Tito, who was leading a Communist uprising behind German lines in Yugoslavia, “whoever occupies a territory also imposes his own social system.
The Red Army, Stalin assured everyone, would not pull back from the lands it was seizing from Germany. Operation Overlord was set for May 1, 1944. In the meantime, U.S. and British planes kept bombing Germany and Germany-occupied France—6,000 bombing runs during 1 week alone in February 1944 to make it difficult for German forces to prepare for an invasion that they knew was coming. Although Roosevelt had become convinced as early as 1942 that the Nazis were killing lews, the planes did not bomb the Nazi death camps or the rail lines to Auschwitz. U.S. planners simply could not bring themselves to believe that anything like the scale of the Holocaust was happening in spite of the fact that by 1944 they had clear evidence
211

232
233

23.4
Operation Overlord
U.S. and British invasion of France in June 1944 during World War II.
Chapter 23 Living in a World at
World War II in Europe ESS Axis powers iSi Areas under Axis control, May 1941 Allied powers
I____I
Neutral Axis forces Allied forces: U.S.S.R. c=Allied forces: U.S. and British Major battles
L
■S "V



but as the tide o^wa^TumeTsoviet fo'rce's^'mov^32'	attacked France and then the Soviet Un'°n'
while U S and British forces attarkpd m • f	across much of eastern Europe and into Germany itself
U.5.
British forces attacked Nazi forces in North Africa, Italy, and finally France and Germany. 672 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
While the Red Army rolled west from Russia into Poland and eventually Germany, and while American and British forces won battles in North Africa and Italy, American pilots joined their British counterparts in what became round-the-clock bombing of Germany. The British had begun bombing German military targets, first in France and then, as the planes got better, in the Ruhr Valley of Germany itself. Precision bombing in real wartime conditions was exceedingly difficult, so the British simply tried to destroy the morale of the German civilians, especially industrial workers, by bombing wherever they could what some called terror bombing. When the Americans joined the war, they initially found the terror bombing to be abhorrent, but they worked out a compromise: the British would bomb at night, bombing wherever they could, and the Americans, with more sophisticated equipment, could bomb specified targets during the day. Ihe first U.S. bombers began their attacks in August 1942, and by January 1943, hundreds of U.S. bombers began penetrating German airspace, hitting industrial targets like the German city of Bremen. The losses of pilots and crews were staggering. Six hundred Americans were killed in the summer of 1943, 16 percent of those who flew missions. One pilot remembered his terror when being attacked by German Messerschmitt 109s:
Ihe plane shook with the chatter of our guns.... As other planes were hit, we had to fly through their debris... .When a plane blew up, we saw their parts all over the sky. We smashed into some of the pieces. One plane hit a body which tumbled out of a plane ahead. A crewman went out the front hatch of a plane and hit the tail assembly of his own plane. No chute. His body turned over and over like a bean bag tossed into air.
And still the crews kept flying.
In November 1943, President Roosevelt left the United States for a second time, flying to Cairo, Egypt, for a third meeting with Prime Minister Churchill and then on to Tehran, Iran, for his first meeting with Stalin, which Churchill and the nominal Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek also attended. FDR was intrigued to meet Stalin in person. At Cairo, FDR also tried to persuade Churchill that Britain must renounce its colonies in India, Burma, Malaya, and Hong Kong and promise them independence after the war as the United States was doing with the Philippine Islands. Churchill was a great wartime leader in Britain, but he was equally a lifelong British imperialist, and he was not about to be persuaded.
The Tehran Conference included discussions of the war in China. In addition, Stalin kept up the pressure for the United States and Britain to invade France as quickly as possible and promised to join the war against Japan once the war in Europe was won. The conference was also a test of the personal chemistry between Stalin and FDR. Although the U.S. president was confident of his own skill in persuading people, he confessed, ‘ I couldn’t get any personal connection with Stalin.” U.S. Ambassador to Russia Averell Harriman described Stalin as someone of “high intelligence,” with a “fantastic grasp of detail” and “shrewdness.” Stalin, Harriman said, was “better informed than Roosevelt, more realistic than Churchill, in some ways the most effective of the war leaders. At the same time he was, of course, a murderous tyrant.” Stalin wanted an absolute promise that the United States and Britain would start the invasion of Germany—code named Operation Overlord—in the spring of 1944. And he wanted to make sure that others knew, as he had told Josef Tito, who was leading a Communist uprising behind German lines in Yugoslavia, “whoever occupies a territory also imposes his own social system.
The Red Army, Stalin assured everyone, would not pull back from the lands it was seizing from Germany. Operation Overlord was set for May 1, 1944. In the meantime, U.S. and British planes kept bombing Germany and Germany-occupied France—6,000 bombing runs during 1 week alone in February 1944—to make it difficult for German forces to prepare for an invasion that they knew was coming. Although Roosevelt had become convinced as early as 1942 that the Nazis were killing Jews, the planes did not bomb the Nazi death camps or the rail lines to Auschwitz. U.S. planners simply could not bring themselves to believe that anything like the scale of the Holocaust was happening in spite of the fact that by 1944 they had clear evidence
t
23.4
Operation Overlord
U.S. and British invasion of France in June 1944 during World War II.
Chapter 23	a World at War 673
233
D-Day
June 6,1944, the day of the first paratroop drops and amphibious landings on the coast of Normandy, France, in the first stage of Operation Overlord during World War II.
An iconic picture of some of the first American troops wading ashore on the beaches of Normandy, France, on D-Day, June 6,1944, to complete the conquest of Nazi Germany.
674 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945

of the reality. Questions remain about why, with so many bombs being dropped, some better effort was not made to stop the trains going to those camps.
Everyone agreed that the Americans would lead the invasion of Western Europe. Roosevelt passed over several other army officers and appointed General Dwight D. Eisenhower to lead the attack. Born in Texas and raised in Abilene, Kansas, Eisenhower, better known as Ike to everyone, had spent his entire career in the peacetime army. He had been promoted to the rank of colonel months before the United States entered the war in 1941. Ike had a unique ability to get people to work together and do so with good cheer, skills that would be needed in the utmost to coordinate the American, British, and French forces involved in the invasion of Europe.
The buildup in Britain in 1943 and early 1944 was huge, with 150,000 U.S. soldiers arriving every month. The British called these American troops overpaid, oversexed, and over here,” but welcomed them not only for what they were about to do for the liberation of Europe but also for the supplies of cocoa, canned meat, candy bars, tobacco, and even toilet paper that they had. Finally, with the tides right and a break predicted in the weather, Eisenhower decided that June 6 was the time to go—and so the day became known as D-Day, 1944.
One young soldier, Elliott Johnson, remembered, “On the morning of June 6, we took off. I can remember the morning. Who could sleep?...I was on an LST, a landing ship tank.” An armada of 6,483 vessels of all sorts of descriptions made the brief seasickness-inducing trip across the English Channel to land on several beaches in Normandy, code named Utah, Omaha, Gold, Juno, and Sword, under intense German shelling and rifle fire. Units of the U.S. 82nd and 101st Airborne divisions parachuted behind the German lines to break communications between the Germans on the beach and their commanders. In the confusion of the invasion most Allied troops were also cut off from their commanders and had to make their own decisions.
Troops landing on Omaha beach on D-Day had to use grappling irons to reach the tops of the cliffs facing them, suffering large losses. Once they got off the beaches and over the cliffs, British and U.S. troops got stuck on hedgerows, long lines of tightly planted bushes 5 to 10 feet wide that farmers in Normandy had used instead of fences and that now provided far better protection for German troops than planners had estimated. Slowly the troops broke past the initial defenses. General Omar Bradley reflected this “thin wet line of khaki that dragged itself ashore” held its ground and then started moving inland. Johnson remembered the odd scenes of battle, “Now on my way down the road I saw, on my right, these dead German boys. On my left, going across the field, is a French peasant leading a cow, cradling its head in his arms, protecting it with his body as much as possible. He had come back to get his cow, leading it away from all the noise and death.” Johnson and the rest kept moving.
American forces moved quickly to take control of the French towns of Brest, Lorient, and St. Nazaire and then moved on to Paris, which they liberated on August 25, 1944. A tank force under the command of General Patton headed straight for the Rhine River and Germany itself. German troops fought hard, but they were outnumbered as more troops came across the Channel. By November, the Allied forces were at the Rhine River and the border of Germany.
In December, Hitler ordered one last desperate Blitzkrieg and eight German divisions roared out of the Ardennes forest to surround American troops in a bulge in the Allied line near the village of Bastogne, Belgium. When the Germans called on the surrounded American forces to surrender, their commander, General Anthony C. McAuliffe, responded with one word, “Nuts!” When the German officer who received the message didn’t understand it, a translator explained that it meant “Go to Hell!” With the help of tanks ordered north from Paris, the Allied forces defeated the Germans in the so-called Battle of the Bulge, and U.S. forces began moving into Germany.

As Americans moved across Germany, they discovered the full reality of the Nazi death camps. Russian units liberated the first camps early in 1945, and then in April, U.S. forces liberated Buchenwald with 20,000 prisoners. U.S. soldiers described the horror of the smell and seeing the bodies stacked up in piles. Just before the army arrived, prisoners seized control of Buchenwald, thinking, correctly, that the Nazi guards might well try to kill all of them to hide the evidence of what had been going on. U.S. forces later liberated Dora-Mittelbau, Flossenburg, Dachau, and Mauthausen camps, while British and Soviet forces liberated others. In many of the camps, the liberating armies found prisoners on the brink of starvation and weakened by disease. They also found piles of corpses, human bones, cremation ovens, and ample other evidence of the horrors that had actually taken place. The Nazis had systematically killed 6 million Jews and another 6 million people—gypsies, homosexuals, people with disabilities, and others they considered inferior humans.
Allied troops kept moving east and Red Army troops moved west. While armies marched, the bombing of Germany continued, including a controversial joint U.S.-British bombing of the city of Dresden, Germany, in February 1945 in which the resulting firestorm killed perhaps 25,000 people. The Russians were soon within miles of Berlin itself. U.S. troops finally crossed the Rhine River in March and the Elbe River in April while the Russian Army attacked Berlin. On April 30, in a Berlin bunker 55 feet underground, with Russian troops directly above, Hitler shot himself. A week later, Admiral Donitz, who had replaced him, ordered all German units to cease operation.
The war in Europe was over.
Roosevelt's Death, Truman's Leadership
Just days before the war in Europe ended, on April 12, 1945, President Franklin D. Roosevelt died. Roosevelt had led the United States longer than any president ever had or ever would. And suddenly, he was gone. In the last year of his life, Roosevelt’s health was terrible. His blood pressure was dangerously high, his hands shook, and he found it hard to stand even with his leg braces. Few of those closest to him were surprised when he died on a short vacation at Warm Springs, Georgia. Nevertheless, the news was devastating. Months earlier, in November 1944, Roosevelt had been elected to a fourth term in office. Unlike the third term, he made it clear early on that he wanted to see the war through to the end. His Republican opponent was the reformist young governor of New York State, Thomas E. Dewey, but more Americans wanted continuity in a time of war. Roosevelt defeated Dewey by a comfortable margin, winning 53 percent of the popular vote and 432 electoral votes to Deweys 99.
The November 1944 election had brought one important change, however. In 1940, Roosevelt had turned to his trusted confidant, Agriculture Secretary Henry A. Wallace, to serve as vice president. By 1944, though, many in the Democratic Party, worried that Roosevelt might not live out the next term, thought Wallace was too liberal, and convinced Roosevelt and the nominating convention to find another candidate. The compromise candidate was Missouri Senator Harry S. Truman. Truman had served in the army in World War I, tried unsuccessfully to open a clothing store in Kansas City, and then worked his way up in the Democratic political machine of his home town. He was elected to the Senate in 1934 and strongly supported the New Deal. In his second Senate term, he led a committee looking into war profiteering. He had been vice president for less than 3 months, had seldom met with FDR, and did not know many of the highest-level government secrets, including the development of the atomic bomb, when, on the afternoon of April 12, 1945, he stood in the White House cabinet room and took the oath of office as president of the United States. It would be Truman, not Roosevelt, who would lead the nation in the final months of the war and the crucial years after it.
As U.S. forces discovered the full extent of Nazi death camps, Americans came face to face with the terrible reality. This 23-year-old Czech victim of the Nazi camp at Flossenburg, Germany, was found by the 97th Division of the U.S. Army.
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War 675
American Voices
Alvin Kernan, A Bluejacket’s Odyssey in World War II
23.4
Ivin Kernan went on to a successful academic career at Princeton and Yale, but in 1940, he was a 17-year-old looking for opportunity. He found it, serving in the Pacific from Pearl Harbor to the Japanese surrender. His is a story of furious battles and long waits, experiencing fear, bravery, boredom, joy, and most of all gratitude for surviving. For many who fought, World War II was not a grand campaign against fascism but a battle to keep going and survive.
In the winter of 1940-41, I stood in the deep snows of the mountains of southern Wyoming and realized that it wasn't going to work.... Seventeen years old, no job, no prospects, I knew how to do only one thing, the same thing all inland mountain boys do, go to sea... .Still eager to work with airplanes, I considered it a stroke of good luck that I had been assigned to Torpedo Squadron 6, part of the air group on the USS Enterprise (CV-6), one of three carriers in the Pacific Fleet....I was brought down to earth that afternoon by being put on the anchor chain work detail. Life on board ship is a constant battle with rust, in which the weapons are the chipping hammer, the wire brush, red lead, and gray paint.... Hard work, dirty, tiring, hot, and totally unrewarded....
[On the morning of December 7,1941 ] The captain came on the public address system to announce that Pearl Harbor had been bombed and that we were now at war with the Japanese.
I didn't worry about being killed, but I did wonder how long I was going to have to stay in the navy now. We all disliked the Japanese and the Germans in a general kind of way, not really knowing much about them....Each sailor was given postcards to send home: two with the printed message"! am well and will write soon," and another two with "I am wounded and will write details as soon as possible." We joked that there should be a third message,"I am dead."...Death lived on an aircraft carrier operating in wartime conditions....[A] thoughtless step backward on
the flight and hanger decks where the planes were turning up led to decapitation and gory dismemberment by a propeller. Planes went out on patrol and were never heard from again.
[In October 1942] A little after 0900, the public address system broke the quiet of the ship with an announcement from the bridge, "Enemy aircraft at fifty miles and closing." In the ordnance shack, just below the flight deck, we could see nothing, only listen, feel the vibrating steel deck, and slide back and forth with the steep turns that came in quick succession.... As I started back across the flight deck, the guns began firing again as a single diver-bomber made a run on us. I lay flat on the deck, covering as much of my body as possible with my tin hat, trying to work my way into it, and thinking for the first time that I was likely to die, and resenting it, feeling that at nineteen I really hadn't had a chance to do most of the things people do and vowing to do them if I survived. From that moment to this, life has seemed a gift—overtime, in a way—and all the more enjoyable for it....
August 13 [1945]—they tell us that the war has ended.... There was nothing to do to celebrate, and I felt nothing, absolutely nothing—no exhilaration, no triumph, no anticipation of going home, not even the simple pleasure of having survived.
Source: Alvin Kernan, Crossing the Line: A Bluejacket's Odyssey in World War II (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
Why did Kernan join the military? How did he respond to the outbreak of war?
2.	Contextualization
How would explain Kernan's lack of emotion upon hearing that the war was over? What light does his response shed on the nature of the fighting in the Pacific?
The War in the Pacific, 1943-1945
While the war in Europe was over, the war in the Pacific was far from over, and U.S. troops were preparing for what they knew would be a horrific invasion of Japan itself. After the successful seizure of control of Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands in February 1943, commanders made the decision to skip some Japanese-held islands, leaving their troops isolated, and instead, “island hop” toward their main objective. U.S. forces moved slowly but surely toward Japan. The defeats of 1942 seemed further behind. American factories produced machine guns, ships, and airplanes at an extraordinary rate, far faster than Japan could match, and enough to supply forces in the Pacific even as the war in Europe remained the priority until it was won.
The war in the Pacific was brutal. American troops came up against Japanese soldiers who would fight to the very last. The Japanese lived by a code that prohibited
676 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945

MAP 23-5 The War in the Pacific. Early in the war, Japan controlled a huge area around the western Pacific, and only a long series of sea and island battles turned the tide.

surrender. The Imperial Japanese Army’s Field Service Code said, “Never give up a position but rather die,” and there were no instructions for surrender. The Japanese troops knew that the Americans would always have more food, more armaments, and more back-up, but they were confident that their loyalty and fighting spirit was enough to make up for all of that.
From bombers based on Midway and on Henderson Field on Guadalcanal, from aircraft carriers, and in battles on sweltering beaches, U.S. troops kept moving. They attacked Tarawa and Makin islands in the Gilbert Islands in November 1943 and then turned them into bases for further movement. In the first 6 months of 1944, U.S. Marines took Kwajalein, Eniwetok, Truk, and Saipan. On Saipan, more than a thousand
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War 677
islands, but by communicating in the native Navajo language, were able to establish a means of communication that the Japanese, expert at breaking American coded messages, were never able to understand.
Manhattan Project
The effort, using the code name Manhattan Engineer District, to develop an atomic bomb during World War II.
Japanese civilians and soldiers jumped to their deaths from rocky cliffs rather than surrender. In air battles during June, U.S. forces, flying new and much better planes, virtually decimated the Japanese Air Force. U.S. submarines cut off the shipment of oil from Indonesia to Japan. U.S. commanders did not stage a landing on an island until navy ships had bombarded an island for some time while planes dropped bomb after bomb. Once an island was secure, the Seabees (the navy term for uniformed construction workers) moved in and with amazing speed built airfields, shelters, and bases.
In June 1944, the United States began a campaign to retake the Philippine Islands. In October, the American and Japanese navies engaged in one of the largest sea battles in history, involving 282 ships and over 200,000 sailors off of Leyte Island. The U.S. fleet was victorious in spite of the continuing strengths of the Japanese Navy and the use of suicide kamikaze planes, basically planes that were used as bombs.
General MacArthur, who had left Corregidor under cover of darkness in early 1942, waded ashore facing carefully located cameras on October 20, 1944, and announced, “People of the Philippines, I have returned.... The hour of your redemption is here.” In spite of MacArthur’s heroics, the Japanese were able to reinforce Luzon, the main island of the Philippines, and major battles during the first 3 months of 1945 took place before the United States secured control of its former colony. Manila, the city that young service men had considered a paradise in 1941, was now a city of rubble.
In some of the fiercest fighting of the war, U.S. Marines seized Iwo Jima island in February and March 1945, moving ever closer to Japan itself. The attacks on Iwo Jima and those on some of the earlier islands were aided by Navajo code talkers who relayed messages in the Navajo language—a code the Japanese were never able to break. Iwo Jima was tiny, only 4.5 miles by 2.5 miles, but U.S. control of its airfield and radar meant that U.S. bombers going to Japan had a much shorter flight.
After a long navy bombardment, Marines landed on the beach at Iwo Jima on February 19 and sank into the volcanic sand. In spite of the bombardment, the Japanese forces on the island were still strong, and fierce hand-to-hand combat followed the landing. The Japanese refused to surrender, and many died at the hands of new U.S. flamethrowers that literally incinerated them. Associated Press photographer Joe Rosenthal took his famous photo of the Marines raising the flag on Mount Suribachi on February 23, but the fighting went on for another month. Of the 21,000 Japanese defending the island, over 20,000 died in combat.
The battle for Okinawa in April to June of 1945 was equally brutal, some 70,000 Japanese troops and 100,000 Okinawan civilians as well as almost 8,000 Americans died there. By June 1945, with the war in Europe over and after intense fighting in the Pacific, the U.S. forces in the Pacific were close to a landing on Japan itself. But it never happened.
The Atomic Era Begins
While armies and navies clashed, a small team of U.S. scientists had begun work in 1942 on a top-secret venture, code-named the Manhattan Project. Enrico Fermi won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1938 and used the prize money to leave fascist Italy for New York. In March 1939, Fermi warned that recent research, including his own, in atomic physics pointed to the potential development of a new form of weapon. When Fermi went to the U.S. Navy Department, a receptionist announced, “There’s a wop outside.” The officers who received him were not much more interested. But some of the world’s best known physicists, many of whom were Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany (11 German Jewish refugees would eventually win the Nobel Prize), were determined that the U.S. government needed to act before the Nazis. A group drafted a letter to President Roosevelt, which was signed by their most well-known and respected member, Albert Einstein, and delivered in the fall of 1941. After considering the letter and the report on Nazi research, Roosevelt said simply, “This requires action.” And action, top-secret action, it got.
678 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
The Manhattan Project began under a stadium at the University of Chicago, where the first chain reaction was achieved in December 1942. Then, under the scientific direction of physicist Robert J. Oppenheimer and the military oversight of General Leslie Groves, the work moved to the isolated town of Los Alamos, New Mexico, where it was easier to keep it secret. The scientists bent all of their efforts to beating Germany in the development of “the bomb,” that they now knew they could build. Ironically, part way through the war, Germany suspended further research on atomic warfare because of the cost and because Hitler considered atomic physics to be “Jewish physics. ’ However, the Americans did not know that and kept going. In Oak Ridge, Tennessee, TVA dams provided the power for the extraction of U-235 (a form of Uranium), and at Hanford, Washington, other New Deal dams, the Bonneville and Grand Coulee, drove the plants that squeezed plutonium out of uranium. With those ingredients, the engineers at Los Alamos could build their bomb.
Over 2 billion dollars was spent on the project and 150,000 people were involved, though only a tiny percentage had any idea of what they were working on. The Danish physicist Niels Bohr who had once said that the United States could not produce an atomic bomb “unless you turn the United States into one huge factory,” reviewed the work in 1945 and said, “You have done just that.” They had. On July 16, 1945, Oppenheimer and his team tested the first bomb in the Nevada desert. That evening, they sent a top-secret telegram to President Truman, “Operated on this morning. Diagnosis not yet complete but results seem satisfactory and already exceed expectations.” Truman, who had been briefed in April, understood fully.
While people in the postwar era have debated the morality of using something of the power of the atomic bomb, few in the administration seem to have had any doubts about it. By 1945, the war had come to a point where the actors would use any weapon they could.
As scientists developed the atom bomb, regular bombs were doing their work on Japan. Boeing B-29s were dropping tons of explosives on Japanese cities. The fire-bombing of Tokyo in February and March 1945 killed almost a million people and left 8 million homeless, far more than either atomic bomb. Still, there was something unique in the use of a single bomb, harnessing the power used in the sun, for warfare.
On August 6, 1945, Air Force Colonel Paul Tibbets piloted a B-29 named the Enola Gay that took off from recently captured Tinian Island. The plane carried a single bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima, killing 40,000 people instantly and
This picture of Nagasaki gives some sense had previously been a large urban area.
r'
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War
As word spread of the Japanese surrender, huge crowds celebrated from San Francisco to New York City. Similar crowds celebrated in London, Paris, Moscow, and Beijing. Most people breathed a huge sigh of relief. The most terrible war in modern history was over. Few knew what the postwar world would look like.
On September 2, the U.S. battleship Missouri sailed into Tokyo Bay. A Japanese delegation came on board to sign the instruments of surrender while an advance unit of U.S. sailors and Marines landed to begin the occupation of Japan. It was a short, somber ceremony. A new era had begun.
Quick Review How did U.S. strategy differ in Europe and the Pacific? Why were these differences necessary? What was the key to U.S. success?
CONCLUSION
By the end of 1939, Europe was once again at war. Both Great Britain and France had declared war on Germany shortly after the German invasion of Poland. By June 1940, France had surrendered to a sustained German assault. Now Britain stood alone against fascism. At the same time, tensions mounted between the United States and Japan. Even those Americans who suspected that a war was coming hoped to avoid a war with Germany and Japan at the same time.
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill asked the United States for assistance in resisting Germany, but President Roosevelt was hampered by both the neutrality legislation of the 1930s and by public opposition to involvement in another European conflict. Through a series of complex maneuvers, Roosevelt managed to provide some military aid to Britain; however, full-scale U.S. involvement in World War II would not come until the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941.
During the war, 16 million Americans served in the armed forces, including 350,000 women. As the country shifted from peacetime to wartime industrial production, jobs were plentiful and Americans experienced unprecedented prosperity. Even during this time of rapid industrial expansion, racial and ethnic discrimination continued. African-Americans and Latinos, though many served in the military, were often marginalized. Ethnic hostility on the home front also resulted in the internment of 100,000 Japanese Americans living on the West Coast. By contrast, the principle of equal opportunity regardless of race, creed, color, or national origin was upheld by Executive Order 8802, which prohibited defense contractors from refusing to integrate their labor forces. Many people from previously marginalized groups were able to find new opportunities during the war, and others returned from the war determined to resist future discrimination.
During the course of the war, the Soviet Union (Russia), which had originally been allied with Germany, was then attacked by Germany. After fierce fighting in the Russian winter, Russian forces began to counterattack against Germany from the east while British and American forces attacked from the west-first in North Africa and Italy and later directly into France and Germany. After years of fighting, Nazi Germany was eventually forced to surrender, in April 1945, just after Roosevelt died in office. After the German surrender, the United States, under the leadership of Harry
S.
Truman, who had ascended to the presidency after Roosevelt’s death, focused on the war in the Pacific, and in August 1945, Truman made the controversial decision to drop two atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which became the first two cities in the world to be leveled by atomic blasts. Japan surrendered, bringing World War II to a close. In September 1945, the world entered a new era as it had only a few times in history. CHAPTER
REVIEW
Why was World War II a life-altering event on both personal and national levels?
682 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Chapter 23 Chapter Review
23.1
PREPAREDNESS AND ISOLATION,
1939-1941____________________ Explain support for and opposition to the growing U.S. support for Britain and growing tensions with Japan.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
Why did so many Americans oppose U.S. involvement in the war in Europe? How did Roosevelt justify his efforts to aid Britain?
2.	Cause and Effect
What factors contributed to the Japanese decision to go to war with the United States?
23.2
MASS MOBILIZATION IN A SOCIETY AT WAR___________________
Analyze the war's impact on widely diverse groups of Americans who fought, supported the war effort at home, or otherwise lived through the war years.
Review Questions
3.	Synthesis
What steps did the United States take to create a mass army in the early years of the war?
4.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the roles of young men and young women in the war effort.
5.	Construct an Argument
In your opinion, why were Japanese Americans and Japanese immigrants interned, while German and Italian-Americans were not?
23.3
INDUSTRIAL STRENGTH, INDUSTRIAL PROSPERITY___________________
Analyze U.S. industrial strength and productivity and its impact on the outcome of the war and on American society.
Review Questions
6.	Historical Interpretation
What factors contributed to the extraordinary U.S. military production during World War II?
7.	Cause and Effect
How did increased industrial production affect the lives of ordinary Americans during World War II?
23.4
WINNING A WORLD WAR—NORTH AFRICA, EUROPE, ASIA,
THE PACIFIC,
1943-1945___________________________________ Explain the course of the war leading to victory in Europe and then the Pacific.
Review Questions
8.	Historical Interpretation
What tensions between the Allies were revealed at the conferences in Casablanca, Cairo, and Tehran?
9.	Comparison
How did the fighting in Europe during World War II differ from that in World War I? How would you explain the differences you note?
10.	Constructing an Argument
In your opinion, was Truman’s decision to use atomic bombs against Japan justified? Why or why not?
Chapter 23 Living in a World at War 61
Fears, Joys, and Limits
1945-1980
PART OUTLINE
