Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
The influenza epidemic of 1918 killed far more Americans than World War I—more than 500,000. Police and public officials, like these members of the St. Louis Red Cross Motor Corps, wore masks to protect themselves. Images such as this one, like the disease, helped spread fear around the country.
Palmer Raids
A series of raids by U.S. government agents in 1919 and 1920 to find, arrest, and sometimes deport people considered to be dangerous radicals.
For many Americans, the chaos of 1919 proved that there was a link between U.S. labor unions, socialists, and the Bolshevik communist regime in Russia. Communism seemed to be spreading with a revolt in Hungary and uprisings in the old capitals of Vienna and Berlin. Maybe, some said, it was coming to the United States. Seattle Mayor Ole Hanson toured the country proclaiming that he had put down a Bolshevik uprising in his city. The Los Angeles Times told people that they needed to wake up to the Bolshevik menace, while former president William Howard Taft said that the Bolsheviks were “crusaders, pushing their propaganda in every country, seeking to rouse the lawless, the discontented, the poor, the lazy, and the shiftless to a millennium of plunder and class hatred.” The Senate ordered an investigation of Russian Bolshevik influence in the United States. Attorney General Palmer presented what he said was evidence of communist influence in the country. Palmer’s proof was a witness who had heard one striker say, “The IWW was not as bad as it was
supposed to be.” It was hardly overwhelming proof of an international conspiracy. Inflation and stagnant wages seemed to have more to do with the strikes and protests than international intrigue.
Nevertheless, people were frightened and the federal government responded. The Wilson administration not only asked Congress to extend the war-time Lever Fuel Act that had prohibited the obstruction of coal distribution during the war but also asked for a peace-time sedition law to continue some of the wartime restrictions on civil liberties. Using the Lever Act, Attorney General Palmer persuaded a federal judge to issue an injunction against the coal strike. Palmer also ordered an all-out effort to find dangerous radicals and appointed a young Justice Department staffer, J. Edgar Hoover, later the first director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, to lead it. By the end of November, the so-called “Palmer Raids” had led to many arrests, and 249 of those arrested who had not been born in the United States were ordered deported, among them, the well-known radical Emma Goldman, who told federal authorities:
Ever since I have been in this country—and I have lived here practically all my life—it has been dinned into my ears that under the institutions of this alleged Democracy one is entitled to think and feel as he pleases. What becomes of this sacred guarantee of freedom of thought and conscience when persons are being persecuted and driven out for the very motives and purposes for which the pioneers who built up this country laid down their lives?
Goldman and the other deportees, along with an impressive number of guards, left New York on the liner Buford, bound for exile in Russia. At the same time, Congress expelled its one Socialist member, the strongly anticommunist representative Victor Berger from Milwaukee, who had opposed the war and remarked that all the American people had gotten out of it was flu and inflation. Milwaukee was not represented in Congress until 1921. The November arrests and deportations were not the end of the hysteria. On January 2 and 3,1920, Justice Department agents led by J. Edgar Hoover arrested 5,000, perhaps even 10,000, suspected radicals in 33 cities. This second round of Palmer Raids destroyed the tiny U.S. Communist Party and caught many others. The size and scope of the raids and the lack of evidence of a widespread conspiracy undercut public support for Palmer. By the spring of 1920, more Americans were starting to question the raids. Maybe there were not as many Bolsheviks in the country as Palmer thought.
Fears about communists and labor unions were not the only concerns to rock the country in 1919. The city of Chicago had been on edge for weeks in the hot summer of 1919. While nearly 5,000 public employees—from garbage collectors and street sweepers to city hall clerks—were on strike, someone put up signs in Chicago’s black community that said, “We will get you July 4.” Somehow, the fear of communists
598 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
and the fear of expanded rights for African-Americans merged as it often did. Black residents, fearing an assault, armed themselves. Then on July 27, a black boy swimming in Lake Michigan drifted across the line that supposedly separated the races on Chicago s lakefront beaches. A white mob beat the boy to death while a policeman ignored them. Blacks attacked the policeman and the white mob.
In the days that followed, armed whites attacked Chicago’s black community, and blacks fought back. An injured black military veteran confronted a white crowd yelling, “This is a fine reception to give a man just home from the war.” The crowd beat him to death. When a group of whites drove a truck armed with a machine gun into a black neighborhood, blacks killed them. When the riot ended 5 days later, 23 blacks and 15 whites had been killed and over 500 people had been injured. Unlike previous race riots in other cities, which had been almost exclusively white attacks on blacks, the black community in Chicago had fought back. The black-owned Chicago Defender noted that “the youngest generation of black men are not content to move along the line of least resistance as did their sires.”
While the Chicago race riot was by far the worst, it was not the only one that summer. In Charleston, South Carolina, a brawl between white sailors and local blacks left two blacks dead and several white sailors injured. In Longview, Texas, a white mob beat up a black school teacher for distributing the Chicago Defender. As in Chicago, blacks retaliated. After the Washington Post published a series of stories about black crime, especially rape, a riot between white soldiers and black residents left six dead and hundreds injured.
Thirty-six blacks were lynched in 1917. In 1919, 76 lynchings were recorded, including some of veterans recently home from World War I. In one Mississippi lynching, the Jackson newspapers announced plans in advance. In September, in Omaha, Nebraska, a mob attacked the jail where a black prisoner was being held, beat up the mayor who tried to stop them, and then lynched the prisoner, William Brown. Only U.S. Army troops under General Leonard Wood brought order to Omaha. As the African-American writer James Weldon Johnson looked at the racial violence and the fear of communists that were roiling the country, often being mixed, he called the season the “Red Summer” of 1919. That Red Summer was a strange and violent start to a decade of prosperity and discontent that followed.
Quick Review To what extent did America's growing involvement in the world contribute to domestic events in 1919?
THE 1920s—THE EXUBERANCE OF PROSPERITY
21.2
Analyze how Prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped American culture.
On May 11, 1921, when Prohibition had been in effect for a little over a year, the New
York Times reported that an attractive 24 year-old legal stenographer from West 156th
Street in Manhattan, Claire Fiance, had been arrested when a detective stopped her to
ask about a suspicious looking package she was carrying and, with a bright smile and
a shake of her bobbed hair,” Fiance replied that she was carrying a bottle of whiskey
(a violation of the law that prohibited the transportation of alcohol). Fiances arrest,
and those of many more women like her, was a symbol of two of the most impor-
tant shifts in American law and culture that took place in the 1920s shifts in many
American’s attitudes toward the consumption of alcohol and toward the appropriate
role of women in American society.
During the course of the 1920 presidential campaign, the Republican nominee Warren G. Harding coined a new word that described the nation s mood. He said,
America’s present need is not heroics but healing; not nostrums but normalcy.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
21.2
Harding's normalcy
A word coined by Warren G. Harding while he was the 1920 Republican presidential candidate to convey what he thought the country wanted—a new kind of "norma I" free from war, international entanglements, and reform efforts.

20 :
Harding’s normalcy was less a return to some previously normal era than a plea to give the reforming spirit of the previous decades a rest. People were as tired of Roosevelt-era reforms as they were of Wilson s internationalism. Many wanted to enjoy themselves, take part in the growing national prosperity, and keep the reformers and the government out of their lives. There was nothing very normal about the era—especially in terms of a national law that banned alcohol, or in terms of the changing roles of women or the new technologies that changed the culture—but it seemed to summarize what many Americans wanted for themselves and their country.
Prohibition—The Campaign for Moral Conformity
Just at the time when many sought “normalcy,” the greatest reform experiment in the nation’s history—the prohibition of alcohol—took effect. Even though prohibition seemed like a reform more typical of the Progressive Era, the way prohibition was implemented was typical of the 1920s. Indeed, prohibition—and resistance to it— defined the 1920s for many.
Americans had long been fond of alcohol. But some Americans had also long worried about the nation’s drinking habits. In the 1830s, the army ended the traditional whiskey ration for the troops. By the 1850s, school children learned to read from McGuffey's Readers that included stories about the “scene of desolation” that liquor created. Some religious groups concluded that drinking and Protestant Christianity were incompatible. The Women’s Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) became the primary voice of temperance reform in Protestant America in the 1880s (see Chapter 19).
While the WCTU sought to persuade people to give up drink, a new organization, the Anti-Saloon League, sought to banish alcohol by law in the 1910s. The male-dominated league had a solid financial base, greatly helped by John D. Rockefeller, and relied on professional experts to organize campaigns, lobby legislators, and attack opponents. In political campaigns, the Anti-Saloon League supported “dry” (supporting prohibition) candidates of any party and attacked any politician it considered either “wet” (opposing prohibition) or insufficiently dry. As elected officials saw colleagues elected or defeated because of the league’s political acumen, they started to support prohibition whatever their personal feelings or drinking habits.
The campaign to prohibit alcohol can be understood as no small part of a larger effort by native-born white Protestants, especially those living on farms and small towns, to retake control of a national culture that they saw increasingly under the sway of recent immigrants. As native-born Protestant America became more and more hostile to drink, many immigrants did not appreciate the campaign for moral conformity that they saw in the prohibition movement.
The Protestant evangelist, Charles Stelzle, though a prohibition leader, was more understanding of the role of the neighborhood saloon than many of his compatriots. While many prohibitionists described saloons as dens of iniquity, Stelzle remembered growing up on New York’s Lower East Side where “the working men...held their christening parties, their weddings, their dances, their rehearsals for their singing societies, and all other social functions” in the neighborhood tavern. Saloons were often where ethnic groups could maintain language and tradition. In the evening, Germans could have their beer, Italians their wine, and Irish their whiskey, while enjoying the company of others like themselves. For people who gathered over a drink, prohibition was an attack on the freedom and acceptance they had come to America to find.
Anti-Saloon League leader, William Anderson, condemned immigrant resistance to prohibition. The Board of Temperance, Prohibition, and Public Morals of the Methodist Church said, “If it is true that foreign-born laborers are rebellious against the country because of Prohibition, it may be said that the country is not being run for their benefit. If they do not like the way things are being done let them go back
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
to Europe. As a result of statements like that, many recent immigrants experienced
prohibition as an attack on their cultures and some of prohibition’s strongest advo-
cates did little to discourage such an assumption.
With the coming of World War I, the Anti-Saloon League had made support for prohibition a test of patriotism. The league had successfully inserted a clause into the Lever Food and Fuel Control Act banning the use of grain for hard liquor, while giving the president authority to regulate wine and beer production. Wilson was no fan of prohibition, but it was hard for him to reject a call for national sacrifice in support of the war. In December 1917, Congress—with intensive lobbying by the Anti-Saloon League—passed the Eighteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibiting the manufacture, transport, and sale of liquor. The league worked quickly to ensure that the required three-quarters of the state legislatures acted and, in January 1919, Nebraska became the 36 state to ratify, putting the amendment over the line. In October 1919,
Congress passed the Volstead Act, sponsored by Minnesota Representative Andrew J.
Volstead, banning not only hard liquor (which many even among the amendment’s supporters thought was its purpose) but also wine and beer—anything with more than xh of 1 percent alcohol. Violating the law carried as much as a $1,000 fine. The U.S.
Treasury was given authority for enforcement. Like the Eighteenth Amendment, the Volstead Act did not ban the possession of alcohol, only its manufacture, transportation, and sale—a loophole that made enforcement extremely difficult. The act also allowed doctors to prescribe whiskey for medical needs and drugstores to dispense it, and it allowed sacramental wine for religious purposes and industrial use of alcohol— all loopholes that would be exploited in the 1920s.
When Prohibition took effect on January 16, 1920, Americans observed the day in widely different ways. Liquor stores sold out. People who could afford to do so filled their basements with bottles (since possession remained legal), and that night, saloons, hotels, and private clubs gave one last grand party. Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt drank champagne with former Harvard classmates at the Metropolitan Club in Washington.
Other Americans held very different celebrations. The best known evangelist of the day, Billy Sunday, told worshipers in Norfolk, Virginia, “The reign of tears is over....
The slums will soon be only a memory. We will turn our
prisons into factories and our jails into storehouses and corncribs. Men will walk upright now, women will smile, and children will laugh. Hell will be forever for rent.” In fact, Prohibition unleashed a crime wave not only because illegal liquor produced great profits, emboldening criminals to new levels of creativity and violence, but also because so many average Americans were willing to disobey the law.
A
Scandalous Age—Bootleg, Ponzi, and Teapot Dome As Prohibition began in 1920, a Chicago gangster known as “Big Jim” Colosimo owned saloons and brothels across the city. Colosimo’s nephew and business manager,
Johnny Torrio, had moved from Brooklyn to Chicago to work for him in 1909, and both men had become millionaires. Prohibition meant they had to change some of their ways, but they certainly planned to continue, expecting increased profits. One day, Torrio asked Colosimo to meet a load of whiskey that Torrio was having delivered to one of their cafes. Colosimo showed up on schedule and, as he walked through the dining room, someone emerged
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
With the coming of Prohibition, federal agents and local police regularly raided establishments that served alcohol and poured it into sewers. In spite of many such raids, alcohol consumption was hardly slowed by the Eighteenth Amendment or the Volstead Act as illegal production and sales filled the gap.
21.1
21.2
21J
21.4
from the cloakroom and shot him. Colosimo died instantly. While no evidence was ever found that Torrio or his new bodyguard from Brooklyn, Al Capone, was involved in the murder, Torrio—aided by Capone—quickly took control of the liquor business in Chicago. The Colosimo murder was only the start of the violence to come with Prohibition—all across the country. Organized crime had existed long before Prohibition, but once Prohibition took effect, criminals from Los Angeles to Boston, in powerful gangs or as individual operators, took control of the now-illegal liquor business in their cities, expanding their operations and criminal networks beyond anything seen before, often violently.
The single most violent incident in Prohibition came near its end. By 1929, Capone had consolidated his control of illegal liquor in Chicago. He also controlled much of the police force, the elected political leadership, and the courts of Chicago and had his own squad of gunmen and rumrunners to bring illegal alcohol to the city, especially from Canada. When an upstart gangster known as “Bugs” Moran tried to take part of his business away, Capone hired professional killers. On February 14, 1929, five men, two dressed as police officers, arrived at Moran’s headquarters. They lined up the seven men there against a wall, shot and killed them, and calmly drove off. That bloody St. Valentine’s Day massacre provided a fitting capstone to a bloody decade wherein gangsters killed each other and innocent bystanders. Many other people were killed in drunken brawls in the illegal saloons, or speakeasies, that proliferated or by drinking improperly made bootleg liquor that poisoned them.
By 1929, after all the killing and dying, Americans were wondering whether Prohibition was such a good thing after all. Capone’s influence with politicians and police made him safe from arrest in Chicago, but after 1929, the newly elected Herbert Hoover demanded that the U.S. Treasury Department do something to uphold the law, even in Chicago, and Capone was eventually arrested and imprisoned for income tax evasion in 1931. The liquor trade continued unabated.
While Prohibition-related crimes made the headlines in the 1920s, they were not the only criminal enterprise to flourish in a decade that many experienced as particularly lawless. In 1919, Charles Ponzi opened a new investment firm in Boston, announcing an extraordinarily high rate of return because of the skill he claimed in international trade. In fact, he simply paid old investors with money provided by new investors. Other than using the profits to live a very high life, Ponzi did not invest at all. The scheme made Ponzi rich and famous, but newspapers and bank investigators started asking questions and Ponzi’s world collapsed in August 1920. He was arrested and eventually deported from the United States. Investors lost all their money. The Ponzi scheme was neither the first nor the last time that someone tried to get rich by catering to the greed of others, but it became the term used to describe that kind of fraud.
Perhaps the largest criminal enterprise of the 1920s was conducted within the federal government itself. In 1909, the government set aside three large oil reserves, two in California at Elk Hills and Buena Vista and one in Wyoming at Teapot Dome. They were managed by the Navy Department until the Harding administration came into office in 1921.
Harding, a most genial president, hated to say no to anyone, especially old friends whom he met for poker games and illegal drinking throughout his administration. When Harding’s Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall asked to have the oil reserves transferred from the Navy Department to the Department of the Interior, Harding agreed. Fall’s long-standing ties to the oil industry might have helped him manage the national assets.
In 1922, officials in the U.S. Navy were growing nervous about the growth of Japan’s Navy and wanted some of the reserve oil pumped and transferred to Pearl Harbor. To meet the Navy s needs, Fall secretly leased the reserves to oil companies owned by his friends Harry F. Sinclair and Edward Doheny for very low rates. Ihe two pumped oil from the reserves, paying a royalty, in oil, to the Navy. The Navy got the oil it needed in Hawaii. Sinclair and Doheny made a considerable profit. After a
Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
602
congressional investigation led by Montana Senators Burton K. Wheeler and Ihomas Walsh began in 1924, it was discovered that Sinclair had made a gift of $260,000 to Fall while Doheny had lent the secretary $100,000 with no interest or deadline for payment. A great deal of additional money seems to have changed hands behind the scenes as Sinclair and Doheny not only stole from the government but from their own companies. Once Congress began to unearth the trail of oil and money, what became known as the Teapot Dome scandal kept spreading. Eventually, the U.S. Supreme Court declared both leases illegal and fraudulent,” Fall was found guilty of accepting a bribe and spent a year in prison, and the Harding administration was tagged as one of the most corrupt in history.
While the Teapot Dome scandal was the largest of the Harding scandals, there were plenty of others. Harding’s appointee as head of the Veterans’ Bureau, Charles R. Forbes, managed to lose some $200 million in 2 years, buying new goods at a high price from friends and selling goods on hand as cheap surplus. The arrangement made money for his friends but cost the government a fortune. Similar scandals involved the Alien Property Custodian office, which was supposed to manage German assets in the United States, and the Prohibition Enforcement Division of the Treasury Department which, it was said, would ignore violations as long as the right amount of money was left in a fishbowl in a New York City hotel room. With senior-level officials of the U.S. government behaving in such a manner, it was no surprise that regular citizens viewed obedience to the law as optional.
r
I
21.2
Teapot Dome
The name given to a major scandal of the Harding presidency in which U.S. Navy oil reserves, including those at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, were used to enrich the secretary of the interior and his friends.
The Vote for Women
In August 1920, just months after the Prohibition amendment had been ratified, the
U.S.
Constitution was amended again to say “The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account
of sex.” The Nineteenth Amendment took effect in time for women in every part of the
United States to vote in the presidential election of November 1920. Women’s suffrage
and the new roles for women that evolved in the 1920s helped shape that decade as
much or more than Prohibition or any other development.
The women most associated with the two amendments—Susan B. Anthony and
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, leaders in the long-lasting women’s suffrage movement, and
Frances Willard of the Women’s Christian Temperance Union—all died before the
campaigns they led achieved their goals. It was Carrie Chapman Catt’s privilege to
preside over the victory. Catt was an active member of both the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union and the National American Woman Suffrage Association. The
organizations provided a network for her to meet other women, and those connec-
tions would determine the rest of her career. Catt served two terms as president of the
NAWSA from 1900 to 1904 and again during the crucial years from 1915 to 1920.
As World War I began in Europe, Catt was active in the Women’s Peace Party but
left it after the United States entered the war. Other women such as Jane Addams and
Jeanette Rankin, the first woman in Congress, continued to oppose the war when such
views were seen as dangerously unpatriotic. Catt, in contrast, demanded a suffrage
amendment as a “war measure.” If the United States was going to fight for democracy,
Catt argued, then expanding democracy in the United States to include women was
essential. In 1919, the Northeastern Federation of Colored Women’s Clubs extracted
a promise from a sometimes reluctant Catt not to agree to any compromise language
in the constitutional amendment that could leave enforcement to the states. They
knew all too well what Southern state legislatures would do with the votes of African-
American women. Sadly, after the war, Catt did all too little to support voting rights
for African-American women, South or North.
In spite of differences about the war itself, women found ways to work together.
Jeannette Rankin introduced the “Anthony Amendment,” the woman’s suffrage amend-
ment, to the House of Representatives on January 10, 1918. The amendment passed
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Tim^
THINKING HISTORICALLY
Understanding Different Perspectives on Women’s Rights
Very soon after women gained the vote, Carrie Chapman Catt helped the National American Woman Suffrage Association turn itself into the League of Women Voters and served as its honorary president until her death in 1947. Some NAWSA veterans debated whether women should affiliate with the Democratic and Republican parties or remain independent. Different women followed different courses of action.The newly organized league— initially an all-white organization—committed itself to nonpartisan education and helping women join parties and vote wisely.
While the league encouraged women to engage in politics, other women who viewed the right to vote as merely a first step toward gaining other rights, pushed for a much more militant approach to women's rights. Alice Paul led the National Woman's Party that adopted a Declaration of Principles in 1923, which in part, insisted:
In short—that woman shall no longer be in any form of subjection to man in law or in custom, but shall in every way be on an equal plane in rights, as she has always been and will continue to be in responsibilities and obligations.
In their quest for these rights, the Woman's Party began a long fight for an Equal Rights Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
Other women took a very different view of the place of women in society. Opposition to women's suffrage did not disappear in 1920, and one antisuffrage group changed the name of its journal from Protest to The Woman Patriot: Dedicated to the Defense of Womanhood, Motherhood, the Family and the State AGAINST Suffragism, Feminism and Socialism. It was a long title but it spelled out their agenda as did a 1921 article in The Woman Patriot that said that they "fought the grant of the ballot because they foresaw that it was the logical boundary line between the old institution-of-marriage ideal of the Family as the unit of society and the Feminist revolt against nature." Battle lines of a contest that would continue for the next hundred years were being drawn.
African-American women had their own concerns. During the 1920s, rigid segregation made voting almost impossible for African-American women or men. They also faced other pressing issues as Charlotte Hawkins Brown (1883-1961) of the National
Colored Woman's Club told a conference of mostly white women that was meeting in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1920:
I came to Memphis crushed and humiliated.. ..[O]n my way to this conference...! had a premonition of trouble [as she was in a sleeping car, but found] twelve young white men sitting around. A young man leaned forward and said, "We have wired ahead to have you taken off this train. Now, we give you your choice, to get off this car right away and go into the day coach, or be taken off.".. .The leader of the crowd said, "Let's march,"and these young men got in front of us and two or three behind and we were ushered into the colored day coach....Friends, what do you say about the cold-heart-edness that we have felt?...We have begun to feel that you are not, after all, interested in us.. .We feel that so far as lynching is concerned that, if the white woman would take hold of the situation that lynching would be stopped, mob violence stamped out and yet the guilty would have justice meted out by due course of law and would be punished accordingly....! want to say to you when you read in the paper where a colored man has insulted a white woman, just multiply that by one thousand and you have some idea of the number of colored women insulted by white men.
Source: Ellen Skinner, editor, Women and the National Experience: Sources in Women's History (Boston: Prentice Hall, 2011); Mari Jo Buhl, Teresa Murphy, Jane Gerhard, editor, Women and the Making of America (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2008).
Thinking Critically
1.	Cause and Effect
How did the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment change the place of women in American political life? What aspects of women's participation in politics were not changed by the amendment?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the responses of to the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment included here. How would you explain the differences you note?

(111
the House 274 to 136. The Senate moved more slowly, but under Catt’s leadership, the NAWSA helped defeat four antisuffrage senators in November 1918, and the amendment was approved and sent on to the states in June 1919. A little more than a year later, the Tennessee legislature gave the amendment the required 36 state. On August 26,1920, the secretary of state announced that the amendment had been ratified.
That fall, more than 26 million women across the country voted in the presidential election. One of them, Charlotte Woodward, at 91, was the only surviving signer of the Seneca Falls Declaration of 1848. It had been 72 years since Elizabeth Cady Stanton and her allies proclaimed their right to vote.
604 PartVIl War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Many women in the 1920s asserted new freedoms not only in dress and style but also in claiming the right to hold a job, though too often the jobs that were available were at the bottom of the economic ladder in places like the typing pool.
s II
A
Revolution in Culture—Manners, Morals, and Automobiles Both gaining the right to vote and Prohibition played a part in fostering a new lifestyle for a generation of young women who came to be known as “flappers.” Flappers cut their hair short and dressed in ways that exposed more skin—on their necks, arms, and legs—than any previous generation. Some flappers embraced their own sexual freedom, objecting to the older rules about sexuality, and many chose to drink or smoke. Certainly the flappers of the 1920s were not the first women to rebel against the sexual double standard that made women guardians of morality. Women had broken out of assigned spheres to fight for the right to vote and for social reform. But in the 1920s, having won the right to vote, the activism of many women changed drastically.
Flappers were determined to have equal freedom as men to do as they pleased in work and in their social lives. The emergence of the flappers was one—but only one— aspect of that new activism. Preprohibition saloons and bars had been male preserves. No respectable woman would enter one. However, the illegal speakeasies that replaced the old bars in the 1920s—often in the same location—catered not only to men but also to women, and not just flappers. As Elmer Davis, a thoughtful observer of his times, said of Prohibition, “The old days when father spent his evenings at Cassidy’s bar with the rest of the boys are gone, and probably gone forever; Cassidy may still be in business at the old stand and father may still go down there of evenings, but since Prohibition mother goes down with him.”
It was not only young middle-class women—flappers—who challenged their status in the United States in the 1920s. The voices of those advocating for women had become stronger, and elected officials began to listen to the newly expanded electorate. In 1921, Congress passed the Sheppard-Towner Act providing federal funds for prenatal and infant care. In 1922, Congress passed the Cable Act, protecting the citizenship rights of American women who married noncitizens. By 1923, three women, all Republicans, were serving in the House of Representatives. Women became active in both political parties and ran for office in all parts of the country. In New Mexico, a descendent of one of the old Spanish land-holding families, Adelina Otero Warren, who had been honored for her leadership when New Mexico ratified the Nineteenth
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontei
60S1
211
21.2
American Voices
Ellen Wells Page, A Flapper’s Appeal 1922
215;
i
Middle- and upper-class young women known as flappers were the symbols of the revolution in morals that took place after World War I. In previous generations, young women from "good families," were expected to be the guardians of morality, but in the 1920s, these women became the leaders of a revolt against the social norms. Flappers wore make up and exposed parts of their bodies—necks and arms—that no decent woman of earlier generations would have shown. They stopped wearing corsets, danced closely with men, and rode in automobiles that gave them privacy. Some smoked, drank, and engaged in premarital sex. Far from hiding their revolt, they gloried in it. One self-described flapper appealed for understanding of her generation.
If one judges by appearances, I suppose I am a flapper. I am within the age limit. I wear bobbed hair, the badge of flapper-hood. (And, oh, what a comfort it is!) I powder my nose. I wear fringed skirts and bright-colored sweaters, and scarfs, and waists[blouses] with Peter Pan collars, and low-heeled "finale hopper" shoes. I adore to dance. I spend a large amount of time in automobiles. I attend hops, and proms, and ball-games, and crew races, and other affairs at men's colleges. But none the less some of the most thoroughbred superflappers might blush to claim sistership or even remote relationship with such as 1.1 don't use rouge, or lipstick, or pluck my eyebrows. I don't smoke (I've tried it, and don't like it), or drink....
I want to beg all you parents, and grandparents, and friends, and teachers, and preachers—you who constitute the "older generation"—to overlook our shortcomings, at least for the present,
and to appreciate our virtues. I wonder if it ever occurred to any of you that it required brains to become and remain a successful flapper? Indeed it does! It requires an enormous amount of cleverness and energy to keep going at the proper pace. It requires self-knowledge and self-analysis. We must know our capabilities and limitations. We must be constantly on the alert. Attainment of flapperhood is a big and serious undertaking!
"Brains?" you repeat, skeptically. "Then why aren't they used to better advantage?"That is exactly it!..."The war!"you cry."It is the effect of the war!" And then you blame Prohibition....But this is my point: Instead of helping us work out our problems with constructive, sympathetic thinking and acting, you have muddled them for us more hopelessly with destructive public condemnation and denunciation....
We are the Younger Generation. The war tore away our spiritual foundations and challenged our faith. We are struggling to regain our equilibrium. The times have made us older and more experienced than you were at our age.
Source: Ellen Welles Page, "A Flapper's Appeal to Parents," Outlook, December 6,1922.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Page define "flapperhood"?
2.	Contextualization
What does the document tell us about typical 1920s explanations of the flapper phenomenon? What was Page's attitude towards such explanations?
Amendment, ran for Congress in 1922, winning the Republican nomination but losing the final election. Had Warren won her close race, she would have been the first Latina among the first women in Congress.
In 1921, Margaret Sanger, who became a birth control advocate while working as a visiting nurse in New York City, organized a birth control conference for physicians and researchers in New York City and later the same year founded the American Birth Control League. In 1923, she opened a physician-run birth control clinic since, bylaw, only physicians, not nurses like Sanger, were allowed to dispense birth control information in the 1920s. She organized several international conferences on birth control in the 1920s. In the 1930s, she tested federal laws against the importation of foreign-made contraceptives and won. In 1942, the American Birth Control League became Planned Parenthood with Sanger as honorary chair. Planned Parenthood also supported the research that led to the first birth control pill, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 1960.
While responses to Prohibition and women’s issues were changing the culture, technological changes of the 1920s also reshaped the ways Americans thought about culture and morality. For many Americans, urban and rural, the radio and motion pictures brought news of national and international events and shaped a more unified and fast-changing national culture. The relatively low-cost automobile made it possible for more Americans to travel while giving younger Americans a degree of privacy
606 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
unheard of by previous generations—especially once enclosed sedans replaced open cars in the mid-1920s. Washing machines, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, and toasters, reshaped traditional housework for women. In addition, new forms of financing allowed people to buy all of these goods on installment plans, dramatically increasing consumer debt while making the new inventions available to more people.
When the nation’s first radio station KDKA in Pittsburgh began operating, broadcasting the election returns in the Harding-Cox presidential contest in November 1920, it ushered in a new era in news and entertainment. Within a very short period of time, hundreds of stations were reporting news; playing records; covering religious services, sports events, and political campaigns; and broadcasting live concerts (once they had figured out how to manage acoustical control). In 1927, Congress passed the Radio Act, which created a plan to license radio stations and regulate the wavelengths at which they broadcast. A decade after KDKA started its first broadcast, half of all American households owned a radio.
Although automobiles had already been introduced, they became increasingly common during the 1920s. Fords, Chryslers, Chevrolets, Cadillacs, Lexingtons, Maxwells, and Hudsons showed up in front of American homes. During that decade, the number of cars registered in the United States tripled from 9 million to 26.5 million.
Auto-related industries such as steel, paint, textile, and tire production along with highway construction boomed in the 1920s. Auto dealerships, gas stations, repair shops, roadside restaurants, and hotels grew. Congress provided funds for the federal Bureau of Public Roads in 1921, and metropolitan areas expanded as distances became easier to traverse. New York City built the Bronx River Parkway, connecting large parts of the city, and Los Angeles opened new highways into the heretofore farming country of the San Fernando Valley.
The 1920s was the first decade in which more Americans lived in cities and towns than on farms. It was also a decade in which suburbs expanded dramatically as the automobile and growing roadways allowed people to spread further than the train and streetcar tracks had during the first wave of suburbanization in the 1880s. The pace of suburbanization was quickened when General Motors purchased a number of streetcar companies and tore up the tracks, replacing the service with General Motors buses. From New York to Los Angeles, the nation’s trolley system slowly withered, replaced with buses that could move more freely but that later added to growing traffic congestion.
Like the automobile, silent motion pictures had been invented well before World War I, and they, too, became an important part of the culture of the 1920s. By the end of the decade, an average of 100 million Americans, out of a total population of 123 million, attended a movie every week. Movies offered fun, escape, and entertainment. For people in small towns and rural areas, movies brought the larger world into their community. After 1927, motion picture technology enabled the addition of sound and voice, and “talkies” became popular. Whether people watched the comedies of Charlie Chaplin, the cartoons of Walt Disney’s Mickey Mouse (created in 1928), the religious enthusiasm of The Ten Commandments and The King of Kings, or the sexually suggestive acting of Clara Bow and Rudolph Valentino, movies gave them new ways of looking at the world. Not insignificantly, movie theaters were air-conditioned well before most other buildings, making a summer evening at the movies especially appealing.
Movies, newspapers, and magazines such as Time (started in 1923) created an age of new heroes. Heroes seemed to be emerging all the time, including “Babe” Ruth of the New York Yankees, who hit 60 home runs in 1927 in the increasingly popular game of baseball, or boxers like Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney, whose matches generated over a million dollars in revenue, or Gertrude Ederle, the first
Listening to the radio became possible for many in the 1920s, unitiq the culture in shared information and shared tastes as never before?
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontentec^me
21.1
2T2
21J
214
Great Migration
The mass movement of African-Americans from the rural South to the urban North, spurred especially by new job opportunities that began during World War I and the 1920s.
woman to swim the English Channel in 1926, or the decade s most celebrated hero, Charles A. Lindbergh, who flew solo across the Atlantic in his airplane the Spirit of St. Louis in 1927 and was welcomed home with what was becoming a New York institution, a ticker-tape parade down Fifth Avenue.
In addition, a new form of self-defined, sophisticated culture took hold. When The New Yorker appeared in 1925, its editor Harold Ross said that it was not edited for the old lady in Dubuque,” but, rather, was “a reflection in word and picture of metropolitan life.” Part of The New Yorkers success was the guidance it gave to members-or aspiring members—of New York’s “smart set” on how to navigate the city s nightlife— which nightclubs, speakeasies, cafes, and hotel lounges provided the best entertainment, the grandest design, and (though it didn’t overtly say so) the best drinks.
The U.S. writers of the 1920s spoke to a generation and class disillusioned with the idealism of past decades as well as the business and money making that characterized so much of 1920s bourgeoisie culture. Many lived abroad and were dubbed the “Lost Generation” by Gertrude Stein, who herself lived most of her life in Paris. Among them were Ernest Hemingway and other writers as different as T. S. Eliot and John Dos Passos. Sinclair Lewis published Main Street in 1920 and Babbitt in 1922, which both looked at the stifling conformity and hypocrisy of small town America. F. Scott Fitzgerald dropped out of Princeton, where he had spent most of his college career at parties, and then described that culture he knew so well in This Side of Paradise in 1920 and The Great Gatsby in 1925. In their literature and their assumptions, the social and artistic elite who lived between the end of the First World War in 1918 and the coming of the Great Depression in 1929 lived at a unique, prosperous, and discontented moment in American history and literature.
The Harlem Renaissance and Marcus Garvey
In 1920 as in 1820, 90 percent of African-Americans lived in the South. However, by 1920, some blacks had begun to move away from rural poverty and segregation in the rural South to new opportunities in Southern cities and in the larger industrial cities of the North. Although the height of the Great Migration—the great movement of African-Americans from rural South to urban North—took place in the 1940s and 1950s (see Chapter 24), it had its beginnings during and immediately after World War I. The result was both a population shift and a cultural flowering (see Map 21-1).
World War I created new opportunities for African-Americans. As work expanded, factories in the North needed more workers. The Illinois Central Railroad, which ran straight from the heart of the cotton-growing Mississippi Delta to job-rich Chicago, enabled those who were moving. The nation’s most widely read black newspaper, the Chicago Defender, announced “The Great Northern Drive” in May 1917. The newspaper called on Southern blacks to make “The Flight Out of Egypt,” commissioned songs like “Bound for the Promised Land,” and negotiated special group rates with the Illinois Central. The paper told sharecroppers about jobs available in the stockyards and meat-packing houses in Chicago.
Black music reflected the emotions of those who moved North. The blues, music born out of gospel, ragtime, and jazz, began on back porches, small town bars and dance halls, and prison cells in the Mississippi Delta early in the 1900s. At first, blues musicians sang of hard lives in the South. John Hurt sang, “Avalon [Mississippi] my home town, always on my mind,” and Bill Broonzy sang, “Anywhere in Mississippi is my native home.” But in the 1920s, the blues moved north. Those who had sung about life in Mississippi began to sing, “I’m going to Detroit, get myself a good job. Tired of stayin’ round here with the starvation mob.”
Some 50,000 African-Americans moved from the South to Chicago during World War I and another 100,000 in the 10 years that followed. Chicago’s black population grew from 44,000 in 1910 to 109,000 in 1920 to 234,000 in 1930. During and after World War II, many more blacks would follow. In addition to Chicago,
608 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945

• w
PACIFIC
OCEAN
strong population growth [	I Mooeraje population growth
r	I Population lof
AfricabkAlnericc
MAP 21-1 People Moving in the 1920s. Many Americans chose to, or were forced to, move during the
1920s. Cities and suburbs grew rapidly.Throughout the era, African-Americans moved from the South to
Northern cities such as Chicago, Detroit, and New York. In some areas, the farmers' depression meant giving
up on cultivated land and starting over to farm another region or become a city worker.
African-Americans moved to New York; Detroit; Los Angeles; Philadelphia; Syracuse,
New York; Oakland, California; Milwaukee; Newark; Gary, Indiana; and other cities
that offered jobs and a modicum of freedom.
Cotton planters did everything possible to stop the northern migration. Ihe Chicago Defender was branded as dangerously subversive. Plantation owners opposed anything more than rudimentary education for blacks so they would have few skills to take north.
In Greenville, Mississippi, the town’s leading white citizen, LeRoy Percy, opposed the Blan because he feared that their brand of terror would lead to “an exodus within a year,” of the black people who were essential to the economy. African-Americans kept moving.
The novelist Richard Wright described the experience of many of the early migrants in his novel Native Son and his autobiography Black Boy. Wright was born to a sharecropper family in Natchez, Mississippi. He left the rural South for Memphis and then in 1927 for Chicago to experience, he said, “the warmth of other suns.” It was not an easy move. Wright remembered, “I had fled a known terror, and perhaps I could cope with this unknown terror.”
Ihe North to which the Southern immigrants came was not always a welcoming place. After World War I, some whites sought to reclaim the industrial jobs they had held before the war at the same time that wartime demand for workers ebbed. Salaries were much higher in the North, but so were rents. Living conditions in increasingly segregated and rapidly growing urban neighborhoods made for tightly packed homes.
Race riots in Chicago and St. Louis in 1919 made it very clear just how unwelcoming the North could be.
African-Americans had long lived in cities like New York, Providence, and Philadelphia. Free black communities emerged before the Civil War in places like Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Cincinnati. In 1910, only a tiny percentage of Northern
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontent
Harlem Renaissance
A new African-American cultural awareness that flourished in literature, art, and music in the 1920s.
blacks were professionals, mostly preachers or teachers in African-American churches and schools. Most Northern black men were janitors, porters, servants, or waiters while black women were cooks, laundresses, maids, or servants. Still, there was often conflict between these long-time urban blacks and the newcomers from the South who started arriving in large numbers after 1917. Each found the social and economic position of the other threatening.
Nevertheless, in spite of fear, pain, and segregation, something very important started happening in the expanding black communities of the urban North in the 1920s, most of all in New York City’s Harlem (see Map 21-2). When the philosopher Alain Locke published The New Negro in 1925, the book he hoped would define the Harlem Renaissance, he wrote that in that era, the African-American was, moving forward under the control largely of his own objectives.”
While the intellectual and cultural leaders of Harlem celebrated their Renaissance, other African-Americans, especially those on the lowest rungs of the economy, looked to the charismatic Marcus Garvey (1887-1940) to foster racial
American Voices
Alain Locke, Voices of the Harlem Renaissance 1925
hen Howard University professor Alain Locke editedVne New Negro, Voices of the Harlem Renaissance in 7 925, a collection of the work of many of the artists, poets, and novelists, whose work was part of the movement, the word "Negro" was the preferred term of respect for most Americans of African descent—just as the term "African American" would be in future decades. Locke became known as the "dean" of the New Negro movement, an artistic and intellectual flowering of an assertive new cultural identity. The acknowledged capital of this new movement was New York City's Harlem, and during the 1920s, the "Harlem Renaissance" defined elite black culture.
From Alain Locke's "Foreword"—
This volume aims to document the New Negro culturally and socially,—to register the transformations of the inner and outer life of the Negro in America that have so significantly taken place....Negro life is not only establishing new contacts and founding new centers, it is finding a new soul. There is a fresh spiritual and cultural focusing. We have, as the heralding sign, an unusual outburst of creative expression. There is a renewed race-spirit that consciously and proudly sets itself apart. Justifiably then, we speak of the offerings of this book embodying these ripening forces as culled from the first fruits of the Negro Renaissance.
From James Weldon Johnson's essay in The New Negro, "Harlem:The Culture Capital"—
In the history of New York, the significance of the name Harlem has changed from Dutch to Irish to Jewish to Negro. Of these changes, the last has come most swiftly. Throughout colored America, from Massachusetts to Mississippi, and across the continent to Los Angeles and Seattle, its name, which as late as fifteen years ago had scarcely been heard, now stands for the
Negro metropolis. Harlem is indeed the great Mecca for the sight-seer, the pleasure-seeker, the curious, the adventurous, the enterprising, the ambitious and the talented of the whole Negro world; for the lure of it has reached down to every island of the Carib Sea and has penetrated even into Africa.
In the make-up of New York, Harlem is not merely a Negro colony or community, it is a city within a city, the greatest Negro city in the world. It is not a slum or a fringe, it is located in the heart of Manhattan and occupies one of the most beautiful and healthful sections of the city. It is not a "quarter" of dilapidated tenements, but is made up of new-law apartments and handsome dwellings, with well-paved and well-lighted streets. It has its own churches, social and civic centers, shops, theaters and other places of amusement. And it contains more Negroes to the square mile than any other spot on earth....
I believe that the Negro's advantages and opportunities are greater in Harlem than in any other place in the country, and that Harlem will become the intellectual, the cultural and the financial center for Negroes of the United States, and will exert a vital influence upon all Negro peoples.
Source: Alain Locke, editor, The New Negro: Voices of the Harlem Renaissance, new Introduction by Arnold Rampersad (originally 1925, new edition New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to the authors, what made Harlem different from other African-American communities?
2.	Contextualization
What did Locke and Johnson see as the hallmarks of the
"Negro" or "Harlem" Renaissance?
610 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
apcara ca ca Ss
mraEEa? EEJ Q Mp
fSnis^g
E2J ES31
IgXjE^^cal _ jQrrrx^r—nil jy< msa tTsiH B i j EEZS3 KX3 A W
——3ESZs;;iaqUfi 1=5°.
'7£o	a □ L
EZZZ] Q
Qt LjEzzoag^ laEzzmavAi
>CS3ESS3EaQ1
B E3 EZXS3 E23
^ar/T,vr:."’}fTflE73 ia E3a tSEB&SSSVsi csre?a gg^y
J £3	3 r—i m
JQtif—~11~1 HC3EZXZ3EZ31 B E23	m
>EZ3CZZ74EZ3| ffl^OEZZ7Z3EZZ3l
acacaaca
|CX3j=3C3tX3
L^ng3ECM3Eir?i E2~a'3	E?’"; r~i rr^i
E-i.<—JLZznag,
maamLJLJ!
Black Harlem, 1911
Predominantly black population
!□
-134TH
CTDCCT
iCTCZJdL
a cm cm cm f—u—nj □acmcmLJEjl §D@S§a[
cm i—o§n§[
12—IL_Icrjrr-It Irrril
c=j| laan^r
Lm,,;;) EKZZS3 CZZZZ3 EZ3 PW i EWZZ3 EZZZZ3 EZ3 E3


MAP 21-2 Harlem in the 1920s. Before World War I, only a few blocks of New York City's Harlem neighbor hood had an African-American majority. By the end of the 1920s, nearly all of Harlem, from Central Park to the Harlem River, was an African-American community, and for many—including the voices of the Harlem Renaissance but also the followers of Marcus Garvey—it was the capital of black America.
pride and self-determination. Garvey established the Universal Negro Improvement and Conservation Association and African Communities League (UNIA) in Jamaica in August 1914.
For poor blacks, especially those seeking to adjust to life in Northern cities, Garvey’s message rejecting integration with white America and focusing on self-help, self-determination, and African nationalism struck a powerful chord. At the beginning of 1918, the New York branch of the UNIA had about 1,500 members. By 1920, Garvey claimed a membership of 2-4 million in 30 branches across the country.
In the early 1920s, Garvey outlined an independent path for blacks, “not to hate other people,” but to take responsibility for their own fate. “We are organized,” he said, “for the absolute purpose of bettering our condition, industrially, commercially, socially, religiously and politically.”
Garvey was at the height of his popularity in the early 1920s.
In 1919, the UNIA purchased a large auditorium in Harlem, and in August 1920, 25,000 delegates from Africa, the Caribbean, and the United States adopted the Negro Declaration of Rights.
A UNIA
parade in Harlem included UNIA men of the African MHnMMraMK
Marcus Garvey, pictured with some of his followers, used lavish uniforms and parades to foster pride and self-confidence in his mostly poor, African-American supporters.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontei
611
Legion in uniform and a delegation of 200 women of the Black Cross Nurses marching in a show of strength and pride.
Garvey created a shipping company, the Black Star Line, to carry passengers and freight between the United States, the islands of the Caribbean, and Africa. This crown jewel of Garvey’s economic development plan was launched in 1920 and eventually owned a number of ships. It was also Garvey’s downfall. Selling stock at $5 per share, Garvey eventually collected over $750,000, perhaps much more. But whether through mismanagement or corruption, or both, the line floundered.
The Black Star Line was attacked by blacks as well as whites. In December 1920, W.E.B. Du Bois published an indictment of the Black Star Line. The finances of the Black Star Line collapsed and with it the rest of Garvey s U.S.-based efforts. He was arrested for fraud, convicted, and sentenced to 5 years in federal prison in 1923 and began serving his term in the Atlanta Federal Penitentiary in February 1925. In November 1927, President Calvin Coolidge commuted Garvey’s sentence but had him deported to Jamaica. Garvey continued to build the UNI A in Jamaica and traveled through much of the world, but his influence, though significant, declined in the United States.
Quick Review How did changes in American culture reflect the postwar desire for fun and leisure? When was that not the cause of change?
THE 1920s—THE CONFLICTS ABOUT AMERICAN IDEALS
21.3
Explain the elements of discrimination, hardship, and fundamentalism that also shaped American life in the 1920s.
While the 1920s are often remembered as the Jazz Age—the decade of Prohibition, speakeasies, new automobiles, flappers, and parties—large numbers of Americans lived quite different lives. For many, the crime and the drinking were an evil to be shunned. Some who refused to violate the Prohibition laws lived quiet and law-abiding lives; others joined organizations that were determined to enforce Prohibition, not always by lawful means. Growing confidence and hope among African-Americans particularly threatened white Southerners, and long-simmering tensions heated dangerously. Despite the relative prosperity, many people on farms and in the poor neighborhoods of big cities still lived lives of desperate poverty. In addition, many native-born Americans came to distrust and fear immigrants or those who were different, and the teaching of evolution threatened the very fabric of faith for others. These conflicts challenged core American ideals on many levels, and reactions ranged from quiet frustration to vocal defiance.
The Rise of the Ku Klux Kian in the 1920s
As Prohibition came into force, the Ku Klux Kian was also revived as a defender of Prohibition as well as an opponent of immigration, rights for African-Americans, and anything that undermined the dominance of white native-born Protestants in the nation’s life. The original Kian had been one of several white terrorist organizations that opposed Reconstruction after the Civil War, killing blacks and their white supporters and burning black schools and churches. Because of prosecution by the Grant administration, the Reconstruction-era Kian virtually disappeared in the 1870s. In 1915, a Georgian, William Joseph Simmons, inspired by nostalgia for a bygone era, recreated the Kian. During its first few years, Simmons’s Kian was an insignificant organization of a few hundred members. Then in the early 1920s, a Texas dentist, Hiram Wesley Evans, pushed Simmons aside and turned the Kian into a hugely successful hate organization aimed at African-Americans, immigrants, Catholics, Jews,
612 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
£
rX
b f f
• •
M
JM.
The Ku Klux Kian staged massive rallies and demonstrations such as this one in Washington, DC, in 1925.
and anyone who challenged the Prohibition laws.
Under Evans’s leadership, the Kian increased from
a few hundred to as many as 5 million members,
including a female auxiliary that became the sepa-
rate Women of the Ku Klux Kian (WKKK). As
the Kian struck fear into many, it enriched a few
leaders who controlled access to everything from
membership dues to Kian robes and parapher-
nalia, which had to be ordered directly from the
national headquarters.
The Kian slogan was, “One flag, one school, one Bible.” It advocated for strict enforcement of Prohibition and—ironically, some thought—a cabinet-level Department of Education that would ensure that all American children were taught Klan-defined patriotism, or “100% Americanism.”
It gave flags and Bibles to public schools while demanding the firing of Catholic and Jewish teachers. The Kian sought to require every student to attend public schools and, in Oregon, got the state to outlaw private and parochial schools, though the law was overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court before it took effect.
Most people understood that the Kian also had another agenda: maintaining rigid racial segregation and, by using terror if need be, keeping African-Americans from asserting the right to vote or getting ahead economically. If a black man was accused of flirting with a white woman, he might expect a whipping or worse from robed Kian visitors. If the Kian discovered an interracial couple, they attacked them. If a black did not want to sell land at a price offered by a Kian member, he or she might expect a lashing until agreeing to sell. In 1920, Nathan Taylor, an African-American attorney in Mississippi who previously had been protected by white attorneys was abducted by the Kian and taken out to the middle of the Mississippi River and warned that, one way or another, he was to leave the state. Preferring to leave alive, Taylor moved to Chicago.
The Kian, often with the Women of the Kian in the lead, launched boycotts of stores owned by blacks, Catholics, or Jewish people. Kian publications condemned the “foreign influence” of the Catholic Church and reprinted articles from Henry Ford’s fiercely anti-Semitic Dearborn Independent about what they called the “money grasping Jews.” The Kian’s Constitution defined a goal
to unite white male persons, native-born Gentile citizens of the United States of America, who owe no allegiance of any nature to any foreign government, nation, institution, sect, ruler, person, or people... to shield the sanctity of the home and the chastity of womanhood; to maintain forever white supremacy.
The Kian provided entertainment in isolated small towns where there was not much to do. A hundred thousand people attended a Kian rally on July 4, 1923, in Kokomo, Indiana, which featured music and food. Almost as many attended a speech by Imperial Wizard Evans at Ku Klux Kian Day at the Texas State Fair in Dallas that fall. The Kian was especially strong in the Midwest and the South, but there was Kian activity from Maine to California.
A number of groups, from the Catholic Knights of Columbus to the African-American press to the new, and specifically the anti-Kian American Unity League (AUL), began to challenge the Kian. Where the Kian spoke of “pure Americanism,” the AUL spoke of “true Americanism.” In some places, pitched battles erupted between
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontei
ie 613
21.3
eugenics
A movement that claimed scientific basis to apply Darwinian theory to the "natural selection" of the "fittest" human beings to reproduce and improve the human race.
Kian members and their opponents, but one of the most effective anti-Kian tactics was simply to find and publicize lists of members in the secret organization, asking, Is Your Neighbor a Kluxer?” Opposition to the Kian, battles among its leaders, and exposure of internal corruption all weakened the organization, and by 1930, the Kian, which had once had more than 5 million members, had dropped to 50,000. Although it did not disappear, the Kian as a power in American life was a phenomenon of the 1920s.
Eugenics and I.Q. Tests—The Science of Discrimination
It was not only the Kian that sought to marginalize African-Americans, Asians, Catholics, and Jews in the United States in the 1920s. The eugenics movement used ideas from evolutionary biology, derived loosely (inaccurately and simplistically, many said) from Charles Darwin, to “prove” that some ethnic groups were more highly evolved than others. The eugenics movement was begun in England in the 1880s by Francis Galton, who concluded that the social elite—people like himself were significantly higher on the evolutionary scale than England’s working class, who in turn were more evolved than society’s poor and criminal element. Eugenics quickly became popular in the United States. Eugenics gave a scientific patina to efforts to limit the immigration of ethnic groups from southern and eastern Europe and from Asia. Southern segregationists quickly latched on to eugenics as a “scientific” justification for racial segregation.
Margaret Sanger, the advocate for family planning and birth control, was a lifelong advocate of eugenics, particularly its focus on preventing inherited traits and weaknesses, which had been a long-used approach to agricultural breeding. The eugenics movement applied this knowledge to human concerns, including various efforts to limit possibilities for those with disabilities such as deafness or limited intelligence— the “unfit”—to procreate.
Henry Goddard, a prominent American psychologist and eugenicist established an intelligence testing program on Ellis Island in 1913, which was used to “sort” the thousands of immigrants entering the country, helping to create some of the notions about higher or lower intelligence in various ethnic groups. Efforts to predict intelligence and ability grew as a result of the development of scientific intelligence testing that began with the Army during World War I. By the 1920s, educators led by Stanford University’s Lewis M. Terman and Columbia University’s Edward L. Thorndike believed that “Whatever exists at all exists in some amount,” and that by measuring the amount of intelligence in a given child—through the newly popular IQ (or Intelligence Quotient) test—educators could assign him or her a “mental age” and sort the more advanced for college and the rest for menial jobs. These tests actually measured the kind of culturally specific knowledge that children of native-born Protestant and northern European families learned at home, so test-takers from those backgrounds tended to score considerably higher than the children of southern Europeans, who still scored higher than eastern European Jews. Those of African and Asian descent tended to score the lowest on the IQ tests. Such “science” reinforced immigration restriction and racial segregation in the 1920s.
Interest in eugenics faded in the 1930s, especially as Adolph Hitler embraced the idea in Mein Kampf and used it as the basis of his anti-Semitic and anti-Slavic efforts to achieve a “pure” race and eliminate any they considered “unfit.” IQ tests remained popular much longer, being used well after World War II to sort and track students in school. In the 1920s, however eugenics and IQ testing enforced popular opinion in the United States.
Immigration Restriction, 1924
While groups like the Anti-Saloon League and the Kian were often hostile to African-Americans, Catholics, and Jews, they found allies in Congress who were also trying to end further immigration into the country. In 1924, the opponents of immigration
614 PartVIl War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
succeeded spectacularly when Congress cut off virtually all immigration from southern and eastern Europe, Africa, and Asia. In addition to anti-immigrant groups like the Kian, labor unions and some African-American organizations feared that a never-ending stream of new immigrants could depress wages or take jobs. Cultural elitists, supported by the eugenics movement, worried that the traditional Anglo-American culture was being diluted. Hostility to new immigrants was not new. In the 1840s, the Know-Nothing Party attempted to limit Irish immigration. In 1882, Congress excluded Chinese immigrants. The largest movement to limit immigration to the United States, however, was led by the Immigration Restriction League (IRL), founded in 1894.
In 1917 on the eve of U.S. entry into World War I, Congress passed a literacy test for new immigrants over President Wilson’s veto. Similar legislation had also been vetoed by presidents Cleveland and Taft, but by 1917, the anti-immigrant vote in Congress was strong. More immigrants than expected were, in fact, literate and the literacy test did not significantly reduce the number of immigrants coming to the United States. People like Wilbur Carr of the U.S. Consular Service warned that Poland’s Jewish ghettos were about to empty into the United States after World War I, fueling new fears of a new “horde” of immigrants from war-torn Europe. In response, Congress passed an emergency Immigration Restriction Act in 1921, for the first time setting quotas for the numbers of immigrants who could enter the United States.
One of the architects of even tougher anti-immigrant legislation was Congressman Albert Johnson of Washington State. Johnson hated radical organizations like the IWW and was convinced (incorrectly) that most of its members were immigrants. He was also strongly anti-Japanese and a member of the Asiatic Exclusion League. In addition, he was influenced by the “scientists” who argued that eugenics and IQ tests proved that Asians as well as southern and eastern Europeans were inferior people to “Nordic” stock. Johnson became chair of the House Committee on Immigration in 1919 and set out to write new legislation.
In setting the quota for the number of immigrants, Johnson decided not to refer to the 1910 census, which had been the basis of the 1921 restriction but which was taken well after large numbers of Russian, Italian, and other southern European immigrants had arrived in the United States. Instead, he referred to the 1890 census, taken just before that wave of immigration, to set new quotas. Using the 1890 census, and limiting the percentage of immigrants allowed into the country to 2 percent of that number, Johnson cut the total number of immigrants allowed into the United States per year from 357,803 to 161,184. The proposed law also tilted the ethnic makeup of the new arrivals against ethnic groups that had arrived in large numbers between 1890 and 1910. Italy was cut from 42,057 immigrants per year to 3,912, Poland from 21,076 to 5,156, and Russia from 5,638 to 474. Yugoslavia, created out of the pre-World War I Austria-Hungarian Empire, was cut from 6,426 to 851 immigrants. Russian Jews, Italians, and Slavic immigrants were reduced to a trickle. In contrast, German immigration was only cut from 67,607 to 51,299 and Britain’s from 77,342 to 62,458. Northern Europeans did not generally fill their quotas, but the rest of the world was reduced drastically. Under the Johnson formula, Japan should have been allowed 240 immigrants, but Johnson insisted that the bill ban all Japanese immigration to the United States.
Urban representatives led by New York’s Fiorello LaGuardia protested. The American Jewish Committee criticized the bill. It did no good. The new 1924 immigration restriction passed the House and Senate by wide margins, and President Coolidge, who had already told Congress that “America must be kept American,” signed the bill. Although some modifications were made, from 1924 until 1965, immigration to the United States from most of Europe and all of Asia and Africa was severely limited.
The 1924 legislation, however, did not impact all immigration. It did not stop Irish immigration since large numbers of Irish immigrants had come to the United States before 1890, which under Johnson’s formula kept the quota high. It also had no
Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti's trial symbolized the fears of immigrants to some and the hopes for justice for others. Vanzetti defined the way he wanted to be remembered. In May 1927, he told a journalist who visited him in the Dedham jail, "If it had not been for these things, I might have lived out my life talking at street corners to scorning men....Never in our full life could we hope to do such work for tolerance, for justice, for man's understanding of man as now we do by accident."
impact on immigration from North and South America, since the bill allowed unlimited immigration from Canada and Mexico. Approximately 500,000 Mexican workers came to the United States during the 1920s. They filled agricultural jobs in the West previously held by Japanese immigrants as well as railroad jobs and industrial jobs in Chicago; Gary, Indiana; and Detroit, Michigan. The Mexican community in Los Angeles, a city founded by Mexican immigrants, grew rapidly.
The 1924 immigration restrictions created deep tensions between the United States and some other countries, most of all China and Japan. The government of Japan, which had sought to work with several American administrations to construct “Gentlemen’s Agreements” limiting immigration, was incensed at the disrespect in the ban of even the 200 immigrants per year that the quota would have allowed. Coming on the heels of previous insults like the 1906 segregation of Japanese students in the San Francisco public schools, the 1924 legislation contributed to deep-seated, anti-American feelings in Japan. Other governments, including those of Italy and Rumania, objected to the legislation. Nevertheless, the United States was in an isolationist mood after the end of World War I, and the protests did not stop the closing of America’s previously very open gates. Members of Congress responded to foreign protests by saying that, “the nation’s immigration laws should be made for Americans and not to please foreigners,” and “No foreign government has the right to tell the United States who we shall or shall not admit.”
Just as the United States was closing its doors, the trial of two recent immigrants polarized the nation. Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were arrested on May 5, 1920, for robbery and the murder of a paymaster and guard of a shoe factory in South Braintree, Massachusetts. They were tried in the midst of the antiradical, anti-immigrant hysteria sweeping the country and were convicted in July 1921. After a long series of appeals, reviews, and massive public protests, during which Sacco and Vanzetti maintained their innocence, their conviction was upheld and they were executed at Charlestown Prison on August 23,1927.
The case of Sacco and Vanzetti took on enormous symbolic importance during the 1920s. Opponents of immigration and of political radicalism generally assumed that they were guilty simply because they were immigrants and self-confessed anarchists. For others, winning freedom for Sacco and Vanzetti could be, depending on one’s view, a blow struck for the cause of anarchism, or for the rights of immigrants, or simply the right to a fair trial. For observers during the 1920s, the Sacco and Vanzetti case symbolized how much a nation made up of immigrants had turned against those immigrants who arrived most recently.
The Farmers' Depression
For many farmers, World War I had brought prosperity as the prices for wheat, cotton, and other agricultural products went up significantly. With new money to be found in every bushel or bale, farmers extended production between 1914 and 1918. Farmers enjoyed amenities as never before. In the early 1920s, one farm wife wrote about the “running water in the house! What a constant cause of thankfulness! What a joy to use all I need and want! No more would she have a long, hot walk to the spring for a pail of water to sooth a thirsty child or to wash a dipper because “the water from that same spring is in our pressure-tank....”
Farmers kept expanding the areas they cultivated. The rich lands of the Delta in northwest Mississippi were still more than 60 percent wilderness in 1914. Bears were seen in cornfields and wolves attacked livestock. But in the war years, the world needed more cotton than ever, and planters cleared land as fast as they could. By the war’s end, much of the Mississippi Delta was in cotton production and land sold for up to
616 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
$1,000 an acre. Agricultural centers like Greenville, Mississippi, “Ihe Queen City of the Delta,” had 15,000 people with paved streets and factories in 1920. Some 20 railroad trains stopped every day, and agents in Greenville sold cotton directly to buyers in New York, Chicago, and New Orleans as well as the European cotton markets at Liverpool, England. Prosperity, it seemed, had finally arrived in the Delta.
Similarly, in the arid cattle country of southern Kansas and the panhandle region of Oklahoma, land that had never been plowed was being turned into farmland as fast as developers and settlers could break the sod with a plow and set up windmills to bring water from deep below. Driven by the insatiable wartime need for wheat and encouraged by the Union Pacific Railroad, which brought settlers, plows, and windmills, settlers filed 53,000 new homestead claims in the Great Plains in 1914 alone. The former grassland was now producing wheat, and many families who started out living in a mud-walled dugout imagined that there was a fortune in store if only they could turn over enough sod. “Plant more wheat to win the war, the government said, and farmers in the Midwest and the Plains, happy to mix patriotism and profit, did just as the nation asked.
Then, the war ended. Europe began planting its own wheat again. Disbanded armies did not need uniforms. By 1920 and 1921, most of the world was caught up in an economic downturn that drastically reduced the demand for everything, especially wheat and cotton. The general economy started to recover in 1922 and 1923, but the farm economy did not. Even with its new prosperity, the United States could not consume all of the wheat and cotton and meat produced on the nation’s farms. For many farmers, the Great Depression of the 1930s began in 1920 or 1921.
Not all farmers were impacted in the same way. Due to the new popularity of ice cream and increased use of milk in American diets, dairy farmers prospered. Vegetable farmers sold celery, spinach, and carrots to city people who had discovered vitamins. But those producing the staple crops—wheat, cotton, and corn—did not prosper. In 1921, cotton, which had brought a dollar a pound only a year before, sold for only 20 cents a pound—if a buyer could be found. Wheat prices also fell drastically However, the price of the fertilizer farmers needed for their crops and the coal they needed to heat their homes kept rising.
Desperate to maintain their incomes, farmers did what seemed logical: they worked harder. If the price for a bushel or bale dropped, the only thing to do was to produce more. What was logical on an individual basis was disastrous on a national one. The more the farmers produced, the more the oversupply led prices to fall. There seemed to be no way to break the pattern.
Senators and representatives from the farm states were desperate for help, and Congress passed the McNary-Haugen bills under which the federal government would set a minimum price for farm products and buy them when the price fell to that level. The government would then store the goods until prices rose. But President Coolidge vetoed the bills as unsound government intervention in free markets. Midwestern progressives complained, but they did not have the votes to override the veto.
In 1927, nature seemed to turn against rural America. It rained a lot that spring. Farmers generally like spring rains, but in 1927, there was too much rain. One of the most intense storms in history came on Good Friday, April 15, 1927. In New Orleans alone, 14.96 inches of rain fell in less than a day. The Mississippi River flooded from Illinois to Louisiana (see Map 21-3). Engineers had been building levies to contain the Mississippi and its tributaries for decades, and by the 1920s, levies were everywhere. Behind the levies, farmers had cleared and planted thousands of acres of land. Cities and towns had grown up. However, prosperity, even survival, depended on the levies holding. That April in 1927, they did not hold. The flood of 1927 covered an area 150 miles long and 50 miles wide along the Mississippi River with water, some of it 20 feet deep, and made 200,000 people homeless, perhaps even three times that number. Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover directed the rescue efforts, and the Red Cross provided aid across a stricken country. Many criticized rehabilitation efforts that spent an average of $20 per flood victim as too little too late.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontent
ime
MAP 21-3 The Mississippi River Flood. This map gives some sense of the huge territory that was impacted when the Mississippi River flooded in 1927.
In the aftermath of the flood, many never recovered. Crops planted later that year were beset by disease and an early frost. Pellagra, the result of poor diet, afflicted 50,000 people in the Mississippi Delta. Farmers gave up on the land. Sharecroppers simply moved away. More blacks moved north, and more farmers—black, white, and Latino—moved to town. Soon, the generally prosperous nation quickly forgot the flood and the devastation.
The Scopes Trial
Ihe general prosperity of the 1920s drove many social changes. High schools began to spring up in small towns and scattered rural communities, offering educational opportunities that had been limited to big cities before 1920. In 1890, a total of 200,000 American youth were enrolled in high school. Thirty years later, that number was 2 million and growing—a 10-fold increase.
With the growth of high schools, some Americans started to worry about just what was being taught in them—in particular, biology. The new high school biology classes were greatly influenced by the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species, which described all changes in plant and animal life, including the emergence of human beings, as natural selection—a process by which random biological changes in individuals within a species that are beneficial for survival become passed on to subsequent generations.
The book was at once controversial, particularly in terms of its theological implications. Most scientists embraced Darwin’s work and saw no conflict between the new biology and traditional religious teachings. Even those scientists who questioned it acknowledged the important contribution. Harvard’s Asa Gray wrote a popular high school botany textbook in the late 1800s that presented evolution as showing that all life was “part of one system,” showing “One Mind.” After 1900, however, a new generation of scientists stopped talking about One Mind. George William Hunter’s textbook, A Civic Biology, simply said “Species have been modified during a long course of descent, chiefly through natural selection.”
618 PartVIl War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Popular religion was also evolving. Before 1900, most Protestants, liberal or conservative, assumed that the Bible was a fairly accurate historical record, but that assumption was challenged by German-inspired “higher criticism” of the Bible that sought to understand the Bible in terms of the social context in which it was written. In reaction, a new movement known as Fundamentalism began within American Protestantism in the early 1900s. Fundamentalist ministers called for a literal reading of the Bible and rejected any other interpretation of the “unchanged word of God.” Fundamentalism represented a new militant form of Protestantism and a much more pessimistic view of modern society. Protestants have traditionally been optimistic about the future. Fundamentalists were pessimistic about a sinful world. They saw the United States of the 1920s, with its open flouting of Prohibition laws, the questionable moral standards of the flappers, the growth of Catholic and Jewish immigrant communities, and the teaching of evolution in the schools, as full of evil.
For growing numbers of American parents and political leaders worrying about the high school curriculum, the changes in scientific thinking and the increasing influence of fundamentalism came into a dramatic collision in the trial of a local high school biology teacher, John Ihomas Scopes, in the small town of Dayton, Tennessee, in 1925. Scopes, as required by Tennessee regulations, used Hunter’s A Civic Biology textbook in his classes. In following the mandated state curriculum, he also violated a Tennessee law against the teaching of evolution.
Between 1922 and 1925, a number of states under pressure from fundamentalists, including Tennessee, outlawed the teaching of evolution. Ihe American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), however, saw these new laws as an assault on free speech and placed ads in newspapers, including the Chattanooga Times, asking for volunteers to test the law and promising legal counsel. Business leaders in Dayton, Tennessee, thought the town could use some publicity and asked Scopes if he would volunteer for the test case. He agreed, and one of the most famous trials in U.S. history resulted.
trial ofTennessee biology teacher John T. Scopes that captured national auenwu.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented Time
ZL
Dayton and the nation got quite a show. Clarence Darrow, the best known lawyer in the country, volunteered to join the ACLU team. Former presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan volunteered for the prosecution. Every major newspaper in the country covered the trial. Most people thought Darrow got the better of Bryan in the arguments, but on the facts, Scopes was clearly guilty. Scopes admitted he had violated the law, and he was found guilty and fined $100, though the Tennessee Supreme Court threw the case out on a technicality to avoid appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, which the ACLU wanted.
Cautious textbook publishers changed their books. In future editions, A Civic Biology stopped calling Darwin “the grand old man of biology and instead simply said that he was a “leading biologist.” Evolution, which in the earlier editions had been a “wonderful discovery” now became merely Darwin’s “interpretation of the way in which all life changes.” Only in the late 1950s would a full discussion of evolution return to high school textbooks.
Quick Review To what extent were the racism, anti-immigration efforts, and fundamentalism of the 1920s the result of changes throughout the United States?
HARDING, COOLIDGE, AND HOOVER—NATIONAL POLITICS AND POLICIES IN THE
1920s 21.4
Analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
Washington Conference
A conference called by the United States in 1921 that led to the adoption of the Five Powers Treaty in 1922 in an ultimately ineffective effort to limit the growth of the world's navies and thus preserve peace.
Three Republican presidents led the United States during the 1920s. The election of Warren Harding in November of 1920 was almost a foregone conclusion given the general disenchantment with Woodrow Wilsons policies, the war, and the League of Nations. A politician who promised to return the nation to “normalcy” was just what people wanted. Harding and his running mate Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge defeated the Democratic nominee, Ohio Governor James Cox, and his running mate, the young Franklin Roosevelt, by 16 million to 9 million popular votes. In what was his last race, the Socialist Party candidate, Eugene V. Debs polled close to a million votes while still in prison for violating the World War I sedition laws. Late in 1921, Harding commuted his sentence, and Debs was freed.
Although Harding was remembered mostly for the scandals of his administration, he also made some very strong appointments. Three months after coming to office, he appointed former President William Howard Taft to the job Taft had always wanted, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, where Taft served until 1930. Charles Evans Hughes, the 1916 Republican presidential candidate, became secretary of state. Knowing that there was no chance of U.S. participation in the League of Nations but wanting to foster peace in the postwar world, Hughes called the Washington Conference in 1921 to try to end the competition among the United States, Britain, and Japan to build up their navies. To the surprise of many, the result of the conference, the Five Powers Treaty of February 1922, slowed the worldwide navy build up and established limits on battleships, battle cruisers, and aircraft carriers in a ratio of 5 each for the United States and Britain, 3 each for Japan, and 1.75 each for France and Italy. No limits were set for other types of ships. In 1922 Hughes also ended the longstanding U.S. occupation of the Dominican Republic.
Harding also appointed Andrew Mellon, one of the wealthiest people in the United States, to serve as secretary of the treasury. Mellon, who served through the Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover administrations, ensured that there was a close and comfortable relationship between government and business. He cut government spending, cut taxes, and retired half of the World War I debt while in office. He was often hailed as “the greatest secretary of the treasury ever” until the coming of the Great Depression raised serious questions about his policies. Herbert Hoover, perhaps the most liberal
620 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
member of the cabinet, served as secretary of commerce for Harding and Coolidge, encouraging cooperation between businesses to stabilize industrial production and the economy.
Harding died suddenly in August 1923, probably the result of a heart attack. His wife’s refusal to allow an autopsy led to rumors that he was poisoned or committed suicide, though there was never any evidence for either. His death came just as the Tea Pot Dome scandal was about to come to light. He was reported to have asked Herbert Hoover “what a President should do whose friends had betrayed him?” Harding was deeply mourned, but as the scandals of the Harding administration surfaced, his reputation was tarnished before the year was out.
Fortunately for the Republican Party, Harding’s vice president, the stern and distant Calvin Coolidge, had no connection to the scandals and quickly took steps to investigate them. News of Harding’s death reached the vice president while he was vacationing with his father in a rustic Vermont farmhouse. Since the house had no electricity, Colonel John Coolidge administered the presidential oath of office to his son by the light of a kerosene lamp—a reassuring image that perfectly fit the tone of austerity and adherence to old-time values that the new president wanted to set. More important to Coolidge’s success, the economic downturn of 1921 had eased, and by 1923, many Americans were experiencing an economic boom, known as the “Coolidge prosperity.” To no one’s surprise, Coolidge, a man of so few words he came to
be known as “silent Cal,” was nominated for a full term by the Republican Party in the summer of 1924.
The Democratic Party was deeply divided between a southern and western wing that was primarily white, Protestant, rural, and supportive of Prohibition and a northern wing that, though also very white, included many Catholics and Jews, and was highly urban as well as strongly anti-Prohibition. The Kian was a force at the summer nominating convention where their opposition to a Catholic candidate who wanted to repeal Prohibition made itself felt. The two leading contenders for the nomination included former Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo, a “dry” who favored Prohibition and was supported by the southern and western wing of the party, and New York Governor Al Smith, a Catholic and a “wet” staunch opponent of Prohibition. They battled for 103 ballots before the delegates turned to the West Virginia lawyer and former congressman John Davis in an exhausted compromise. Others, disgusted with both parties, rebuilt the old Progressive Party of 1912 and nominated Wisconsin s popular progressive Senator Robert La Follette for president.
Coolidge’s victory in the 1924 elections was as decisive as Harding s had been in 1920. He won 54 percent of the total with only 28.8 percent for the Democrats and 16.6 percent for the La Follette Progressives. Except for Wisconsin, which went for La Follette, Coolidge carried every state outside of the then solidly Democratic South.
The Coolidge administration took some important steps in foreign policy. Just before he took office as Coolidge’s vice president, Charles G. Dawes negotiated the so-called Dawes Plan to help ameliorate the German financial crisis brought on by the huge reparations payments to Britain and France. In 1925, Coolidge appointed Frank Kellogg as secretary of state. Two years later in 1927, French foreign minister Aristide Briand proposed a joint U.S.-French alliance, but Kellogg turned the conversation to a multilateral treaty. The Kellogg-Briand Pact outlawing war was signed in Paris in
/aw.Gneher.
WILL THE BRAKES HOLD?
As this cartoon shows, the Tea Pot Dome scandal that came to light in 1923 soon after President Harding's death threatened to steamroll over many leaders of the Republican Party. However, the fact that the new Republican president, Calvin Coolidge, had nothing to do with it allowed party leaders to distance themselves from the scandal and, in the end, have an easy road to the White House in the November 1924 elections.
The Kellogg-Briand Pact
1928 international treaty that denounced aggression and war but lacked provisions! enforcement.
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discontented
621
21.4
August 1928, and eventually, 62 nations were signatories to the much acclaimed agreement. Unfortunately, unlike the plan for the League of Nations, there was no enforcement mechanism to the Kellogg-Briand Pact. While passive at home, U.S. government under Coolidge also enthusiastically encouraged engagement with Latin America, maintaining military force in some countries and doubling investment in others. After coming to office in 1929, Hoover tried to improve relations with Latin America, removing American troops from Nicaragua and Haiti. In addition, while not officially recognizing the government of the new Soviet Union, the Coolidge and Hoover administrations encouraged business investment and the Soviet government welcomed it, especially the mass-production of automobiles that they called Fordism.
The 1928 presidential election that brought Hoover to office was very different and much closer than the previous two. The tone of the contest was angrier. When Calvin Coolidge announced that he would not seek another term as president, the Republicans nominated Hoover. The Democrats, tired of their losses in 1920 and 1924, decided that Al Smith’s charisma and enthusiastic support in the North would make him a winner. After all, many asked, didn’t the South vote for the Democratic nominee no matter who he was?
On many issues, Hoover and Smith were not far apart. Hoover was more liberal than Coolidge and privately worried that the Coolidge prosperity was a balloon that would surely pop. He said that he looked forward to the day when “poverty will be banished from this nation,” though he saw business success, not government intervention, as the key to accomplishing that goal. Coolidge once called him “that damn Bolshevik.” Smith was also a friend to big business. Once nominated, Smith chose John J. Raskob of General Motors to run his campaign and included several leading industrialists in his inner circle.
Nevertheless, there were two huge differences between the candidates. Hoover was a “dry” who favored continuing Prohibition, and Smith was a “wet” committed to ending it. Hoover called Prohibition “a great social and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose.” Smith told the convention that nominated him that “there should be fundamental changes in the present provisions for national prohibition.” With many people becoming disillusioned with Prohibition, on that issue alone Smith might have had the edge.
However, another issue influenced the race. Hoover, a Quaker, was a Protestant. Smith was a Catholic. Many Catholic voters in places like Boston, New York, Chicago, and San Francisco rallied to Smith with an enthusiasm they had never shown for any previous presidential candidate. Meanwhile, in much of the nation’s Protestant heartland, Smith’s Catholicism was the heated issue of the campaign. The candidate himself thought he had addressed the issue, but as he campaigned in the Midwest and South, Smith could see burning crosses on the hillsides and his rallies were met by Kian members. At one rally in Oklahoma, Smith eyed the crowd and commented to a reporter, “I don’t know those people out there. I don’t speak their language.” On election day in November 1928, Hoover won, carrying states in the South that had not voted Republican since the end of Reconstruction and even Smith’s home state of New York. Smith won 40 percent of the vote and carried Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and parts of the South, but Hoover’s 58 percent of the vote and 444 electoral votes guaranteed that he could enter the White House with a solid mandate. The stock market responded to Hoover’s election by reaching greater heights than ever before. The new president kept his reservations about the stock market bubble to himself. The nation seemed confident in their new president, the economy, and the way society had been moving for the last 10 years. It would be Hoover’s bad luck that none of this confidence would last through his first year in office.
Quick Review How were the elections of 1924 and 1928 similar? How were they different?
622 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
CONCLUSION
Ihe 1920s marked a period of significant social and political change in the United States. This period, known by many as the “Jazz Age,” began at the conclusion of World War I and ended with the stock market crash in 1929. For many Americans, especially those in the middle and upper classes, the 1920s were a time of prosperity. For other Americans, however, the 1920s were harsh.
In the so-called Red Summer of 1919, many working people in the United States were deeply dissatisfied with the terms and conditions of their employment. They wanted their salaries adjusted to reflect the inflation generated by the war, and they also wanted a share of the postwar boom. Strikes were common as were violent confrontations between wage earners and business elites, whose fear of bolshevism intensified their opposition to organized labor. Racial tensions also boiled over in that summer, and race riots took place in cities around the country.
In January 1920 when the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution outlawed the manufacture, sale, or transportation” of any alcoholic beverage, the resulting era of Prohibition set off a wave of opposition. Bootleggers found ways to manufacture and sell alcohol in defiance of the Eighteenth Amendment, and average citizens found ways to drink alcohol as they flouted the law. The widespread prosperity and contempt for Prohibition also set the stage for other law breaking during the decade, including investment fraud and corruption in the federal government.
In this turbulent period, women gained the right to vote when the Nineteenth Amendment was passed. With their newly gained power, some younger women declared themselves to be “flappers,” flouting social conventions, and many women began reforms around prenatal care and birth control as well as other issues relevant to them. The presidential election of November 1920 was the first election in which women in every state in the United States took part.
Technological innovations combined with favorable government policies toward business resulted in high corporate profits throughout the decade. The economic growth of 1920s sustained a new mass culture focused on materialism and consumerism and was characterized by the automobile, the radio, and the movies. Social and cultural change affected all Americans. African-Americans began the Great Migration, a movement of large numbers of Southern blacks from the rural South to the urban North, which continued from the 1920s to the 1960s. Newly arriving African-Americans in the North launched the Harlem Renaissance, a flowering of black culture in music, novels, and poetry, centered in New York City’s Harlem while others became followers of Marcus Garvey.
For many other Americans, the 1920s were a difficult time. While sweeping changes of the 1920s were welcomed by many, a large portion of American society objected to what they saw as the erosion of traditional American values, leading to a resurgent Ku Klux Kian among other things. The black community faced brutal racism in both the North and the South. Race riots swept across the country from Chicago, Illinois, to Charleston, South Carolina, wherever blacks began to push for greater equality and economic opportunity. A nation built on immigration turned against immigrants, and 1924 legislation drastically reduced immigration to the United States. White farmers in the Midwest and South also suffered greatly as crop prices plummeted. The government largely ignored the plight of these Americans. Other Americans turned to a new kind of religious fundamentalism challenging such things as the teaching of evolution in the public schools.
Three Republican presidents—Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert C. Hoover—presided over the nation during the 1920s and while they differed among themselves, all three supported the growth of a business-oriented culture and saw business success as the key to prosperity for all.
TER E W
Why is the 1920s a unique era in American history?
Chapter 21 A Unique, Prosperous, and Discon
Chapter 21 Chapter Review
THE PRELUDE—THE RED SUMMER OF
1919 21.1
Explain how events at the end of World War I shaped the decade that followed.
Review Questions
1.	Cause and Effect
What factors contributed to the Red Summer of 1919?
2.	Contextualization
How did issues and tensions emerging from World War I create the anger and violence of 1919?
21.2
THE 1920s—THE EXUBERANCE OF PROSPERITY___________________
Analyze how Prohibition and other developments of the 1920s reshaped American culture.
Review Questions
3.	Construct an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: “If it were not for American participation in World War I, Prohibition would never have been enacted.”
4.	Historical Interpretation
What light does the Teapot Dome scandal shed on the nature of Republican government in the 1920s?
5.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the domestic ideal of womanhood of the late 1800s with the “new woman” epitomized by the flappers of the 1920s. What was new about the “new woman”?
21.3
THE 1920s—THE CONFLICTS ABOUT AMERICAN IDEALS
Explain the elements of discrimination, hardship, and fundamentalism that also shaped American life in the 1920s.
Review Questions
6.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the Ku Klux Kian of the 1860s and 1870s with the Kian of the 1920s. How did the new Kian differ from the original Kian?
7.	Synthesis
How did anti-immigrant sentiment shape the culture of the 1920s?
HARDING, COOLIDGE, AND HOOVER—NATIONAL POLITICS AND POLICIES IN THE
1920s 21.4
Analyze the political and policy developments of the decade.
Review Questions
8.	Constructing an Argument
What accounts for the Republican dominance of national politics in the 1920s?
9.	Synthesis
What connections can you make between the election of 1928 and the general social and cultural trends of the 1920s?
624 Part VII War, Prosperity, and Depression, 1890-1945
Living in Hard Times
22
1929-1939
During the Great Depression, lines of unemployed impoverished workers seeking food and shelter could be seen in cities and towns across the United States.
In late October 1929, the value of shares sold on the New York Stock Exchange, known as Wall Street, collapsed. Prices kept dropping for the next 3 years in a dizzying decline in which paper wealth simply evaporated. For most Americans, the stock market crash seemed irrelevant at first. For industrial workers, who rarely owned stock, the value of shares in the enterprises where they worked was not important, but the subsequent drop in industrial jobs as production of automobiles, radios, appliances, and clothing dried up was all too real. For many farmers in the Deep South and those trying to get by farming small mountainous farms in Appalachia, the Depression had come much earlier, beginning with the drop in agricultural prices in 1920 (see Chapter 21). For other farmers, especially those who had plowed the plains and created the wheat farms of Oklahoma and Kansas in the 1910s and 1920s, the full impact of the Depression came later. Wheat farmers struggled with the fact that a glut in the world supply of wheat kept prices low all through the 1920s, but it was with the terrible dust storms of the 1930s, storms in which the child of one farmer remembered, “you couldnt see your hand in front a’ your face,” that the full impact of the Depression was felt in this region. This chapter traces the story of the many causes that led to the long years of the Great Depression, and the impact of the Depression °n the political climate in the United States and the world.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
MHVVINM

tWWiBRiSi
THE COMING OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Explain the coming of the Great Depression and the initial response to it.
THE NEW DEAL
Explain the goals and results of the New Deal and the responses to change on the part of diverse Americans.
THE DEEP ROOTS OF WAR—THE UNITED STATES, EUROPE, AND ASIA
Analyze the international impact of the Depression, German and Japanese military expansion, and the initial U.S. response.
