CHAPTER 26
Lives Changed, 1961—1968
New Voices, New Authorities
Camelot, the White House and Dallas—The Kennedy Administration The Coming of Lyndon B. Johnson
CHAPTER27
Rights, Reaction, and Limits, 1968-1980
The New Politics of the Late 1960s
The Movements of the 1960s and 1970s
The Culture Wars of the 1970s
Politics, Economics, and the Impact of Watergate
1945-1952
• <	£ fA‘
Members of 11th Airborne Division kneel on the ground as they watch the mushroom cloud of a 1951 atomic bomb test in Nevada.Threat of the new weapon hung over the world during the Cold War.
CHAPTER
OBJECTIVE
n August 6, 1945, the White House released a statement from President Harry Truman:
Sixteen hours ago an American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima.... It is an atomic bomb. It is a harnessing of the basic power of the universe. The force from which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those who brought war to the Far East.
Thus began the atomic age, a new and previously unimagined era. The bomb brought World War II to a quick end, but it also launched the United States and the world into an uncharted arena. For people living in the United States in 1945, that announcement was but one of many extraordinary changes that year.
In early May, less than a month after Roosevelt’s death on April 12, Nazi Germany surrendered. In June, the United Nations, a new international organization designed to preserve peace, held its first meeting. Then came the news of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima on August 6 and Nagasaki on August 9. Japan surrendered on August 14. World War II was over.
During the 2-day holiday that followed, Americans celebrated the coming of peace. Few had any sense of what peace would mean. People wanted to get on with their lives, even if it was hard to imagine what the new “normal”
Demonstrate an understanding of the post-World War II world that emerged in the United States.
THE UNITED STATES IN
1945____________________ Describe the new technology, living patterns, and political arrangements in the United States that resulted from World War II.
THE COLD WAR BEGINS_______________________
Analyze the coming of the Cold War, tensions with the Soviet Union, and McCarthyism at home.
24.1
24.2
POLITICS, 1948 AND 1952______________________
Explain political developments that led to the elections of Truman and then Eisenhower as Cold War era presidents.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created 6&
■ Significant Dates
■—  .............—
1944	Bretton Woods Conference creates International Monetary Fund and World Bank
Dumbarton Oaks Conference
Great migration of African-Americans to the North expands
1945	Franklin D. Roosevelt dies and Harry S. Truman becomes president
Nazi Germany surrenders
UN charter approved and ratified
Truman meets with Stalin at Potsdam, Germany
First successful test of atomic bomb United States drops atomic bomb on Japan Japan surrenders
1946	George Kennan's "long telegram"
Winston Churchill's iron curtain speech U.S. baby boom begins
1947	Marshall Plan proposed Levittown, New York, housing opens
1948	United States recognizes new state of Israel Beginning of Berlin Airlift
Truman defeats Dewey, Wallace, and Thurmond in presidential election UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights
1949	Berlin Airlift ends
Senate ratifies U.S. membership in NATO Soviet Union tests atomic bomb Chiang Kai-shek leaves mainland China
1950	Alger Hiss convicted of lying under oath
Joseph McCarthy speech in Wheeling,
West Virginia
North Korea invades South Korea
U.S. landing at Inchon, Korea
Chinese forces drive UN force south of the 38th parallel
1952 Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for president
might look like. A Navy petty officer and his wife, walking hand in hand through the celebrations in Seattle on August 14, told a reporter their plans: Raise babies and keep house!” Many returning from the war followed these plans, but they did so in a world much more complex than could be imagined on that idyllic August evening. This chapter traces the experience of those Americans who built a new world in the after-math of World War II, describing not only their hopes and fears but also their surprises and disappointments as the postwar world took shape between 1945 and 1952.
THE UNITED STATES IN
1945 24.1
Describe the new technology, living patterns, and political arrangements in the United States that resulted from World War II.
Those who had been fighting in Europe or Asia wanted to get home as fast as they could, certainly faster than was possible given difficulties in transporting troops and managing Germany and Japan. For some women working in wartime production, it was time to welcome a long-absent husband or boyfriend, quit work, and raise a family. Other women very much wanted to continue working. For some who had moved because of the war, it was time to go home. Others who had moved wanted to stay in their new locations and have families join them. For industrial leaders, peacetime conversion meant new profits that would come from fulfilling pent-up demands for goods that had been unavailable during the war and from harnessing new discoveries related to medicines and emerging technologies. For government leaders, negotiating the international arrangements and managing the uneasy postwar alliances, especially with the United Soviet Socialist Republic (U.S.S.R.), commonly called the Soviet Union, made the postwar era one of the most difficult ever.
Science, Medicine, Technology, and the Bomb
If the nuclear physicists who designed and built the atomic bomb were in the vanguard of wartime scientific breakthroughs, biologists and medical researchers were not far behind. During World War II, the wonder drugs—penicillin and streptomycin-combated infections and resulted in a dramatic reduction in battlefield deaths. Soon after the war, medical scientists and pharmaceutical companies marketed other new antibiotics. The National Institutes of Health, which had begun as a tiny government agency in the 1930s, now led the nations war on disease.
By 1956, 80 percent of prescribed drugs had been invented after the beginning of World War II. Vaccines ended traditional childhood diseases such as whooping cough, diphtheria, mumps, and measles. In 1955, a vaccine was found for the feared scourge of polio. For those having a hard time keeping pace with modern life, physicians offered tranquilizers, sales of which boomed. People were growing taller and living longer thanks to advances in medicine, nutrition, and hygiene. In 1940, the average American’s lifespan was 62.9 years, but by 1960 it had reached 69.7. Science, it seemed, was offering the key to life itself.
For consumers, science and technology offered tangible improvements that changed daily life. In 1945, consumers were being introduced to freezers, dishwashers, automatic transmissions, and ballpoint pens. In offices, workers were beginning to use electric typewriters. Other technologies that had been developed prior to World War II —from washing machines to electric ranges to electric trains—were suddenly available after wartime production restrictions were lifted. Pent-up consumer demand and industrial availability combined quickly. What had been impossible to find during the war was now in every store.
No automobiles for private use had been produced in the United States between 1942 and 1945. But by 1947, new models were replacing the old vehicles from the 1930s. Sales of passenger cars jumped to 6.7 million per year in 1950 and to 7.9 million
686 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
in 1955. General Motors, which then sold about half of all cars in America, became the first corporation to earn $1 billion in a single year. Advertising by General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler convinced people to trade in 4.5 million old cars per year in the 1950s for large, sleek new models with automatic transmissions, air conditioning, and picturesque tail fins. By 1960, 80 percent of all American families owned a car, and 15 percent owned two or more cars.
While most households had radios in 1945, only a very few had televisions (black and white, of course). Television was developed by a number of inventors, notably Philo T. Farnsworth in the early 1930s, and was introduced at the 1939 New York World’s Fair. But television production stopped during World War II while factories made radar equipment. The number of television sets in American homes exploded after the war. In 1946, 8,000 homes owned a set; by 1950, 5 million; and by 1960,45 million—or 90 percent of all American homes. In 1945, half of the nation’s farm homes, where 25 million people lived, still did not have electricity to plug in a TV, but that too would change very quickly.
Hanging over all of the advances, however, was the atomic bomb. As Americans learned more about the bomb, they realized that it could end all of their improved health and new-found prosperity. Few Americans had questioned the morality of using the atomic bomb in 1945; indeed, only a tiny handful even knew that the weapon existed before its use. The few physicists who had developed the bomb understood what it meant, however. Very soon, many more came to understand the sobering reality of “the mushroom cloud” that a nuclear explosion unleashed. “The bomb” might be a new form of protection, since only the United States had it, but it was also a new threat (see Chapter 23).
Some scientists proposed the voluntary sharing of atomic technology to avoid an arms race, but President Truman decided that the safest course was for the United States to retain sole knowledge of nuclear secrets. However, in 1949, to the great surprise of many, the Soviet Union successfully tested its own atomic bomb. By that time, the wartime ally had become a potential enemy. Suddenly, with the Russian test, the idea that the United States was protected by its unique control of the bomb vanished. Before long, other nations joined the “atomic club.” Great Britain, the closest U.S. ally, exploded its own bomb in 1952, France followed in 1960, and others were not far behind. Above all other concerns, however, the fear of the Russian bomb is what hung over Americans.
Officials and scientists within the Truman administration debated the development of an even more powerful weapon to counter the Russian bomb. The atomic bomb depended on nuclear fission (the splitting of an atom), but scientists knew that theoretically an even more powerful explosion could arise from nuclear fusion (the merging of atoms) to create a thermonuclear explosion—a hydrogen bomb. While virtually no one involved opposed the development of the atomic bomb during World War II, many senior scientists opposed the “super bomb. Albert Einstein, whose scientific work formed the basis for nuclear science, said that with such a super bomb, “general annihilation beckons.” J. Robert Oppenheimer, who led the development of the first atomic bomb at Los Alamos, New Mexico, in 1944, opposed the larger bomb on moral and practical grounds. George Kennan, the state department official often most associated with the coming of the Cold War, argued that an arsenal of atom bombs was ample deterrent for the Soviets. Others disagreed. When President Truman asked his advisory panel, “Can the Russians do it? even those who opposed development of the hydrogen bomb had to answer yes. The president responded, In that case, we have no choice. We’ll go ahead.
The science and the engineering involved were daunting. When many of those who had built the first atomic bombs declined to participate in the new project, a fresh team, led by Hungarian refugees Edward Teller and John von Neumann, moved ahead. The first U.S. test of a thermonuclear bomb took place on November 1, 1952, at Eniwetok Atoll in the Pacific. The predictions about the Russian capabilities also became true: the first Russian bomb was exploded in Siberia in August 1953, little more than 9 months after the first U.S. test.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created
24.1
243
243
The bombs that the United States and Russia exploded were powerful beyond imagination. The United States’ test sent a fireball 5 miles into the sky and produced a mushroom cloud Y1 miles high and 8 miles wide. Eniwetok Island disappeared, replaced by a large hole in the ocean floor. The Soviet bomb was similar. Soviet Premier Georgi Malenkov told the world that “the United States no longer has a monopoly on the hydrogen bomb.” The possibility of mutually assured destruction,” influenced international diplomacy and daily life. Children practiced hiding under school desks in case of nuclear attack, (though critics wondered what good that would do in the face of a bomb that could vaporize a city.) Families built bomb shelters in their basements. The bomb was as much a part of daily life in the 1950s as televisions, new automobiles, or healthier lives.
Gl Bill of Rights
Legislation in June 1944 that eased the return of veterans into American society by providing educational and employment benefits.
baby boomers
The name given to the generation of children born to the families of returning World War II veterans between 1945 and 1960.
Returning Veterans, the Baby Boom, and Suburban Homes
In August 1945, as World War II ended, 12 million American men were in the military, two-thirds of those between the ages of 18 and 34. They had been through a brutal war, and now they wanted get home and get on with their lives. Those waiting at home were equally anxious to get the troops back. It took time to organize the military governance of Germany and Japan and to arrange the transport of troops. By fall, members of Congress started to get warning letters, “No boats, no votes.” Demobilization moved at a rapid pace. In less than a year, three-quarters of those in the military had been mustered out, leaving an active military of 3 million. Congress voted to cut that number to 1 million in another year.
Coming home from the war was joyous but also difficult. Soldiers and sailors, desperately tired of the killing, the dying, and the boredom of war, sometimes had a hard time adjusting to a world where life had gone on without them and in which civilians could never comprehend the horrors they had experienced. Married couples who had been apart, sometimes for 3 or 4 years, especially those who had married just before a husband shipped out, found adjustments difficult. The divorce rate skyrocketed in the late 1940s.
The government offered generous benefits to returning service men (and the few service women) to help with the adjustment. The GI Bill of Rights provided $20 per week for up to a year for those seeking new jobs. (The maximum payment of $1,040 for a full year was very close to the average American salary of $1,074 in 1945.) The GI Bill also offered college tuition for returning veterans, allowing a whole generation of young men to be the first in their families to attend college and prepare for middle-class occupations. In addition, the Veterans Administration made loans available for veterans to buy a house. Only later would some note that since the draft often passed over African-Americans and Latinos and excluded women, the GI Bill constituted a kind of affirmative action for white men. But in 1945, most Americans thought that these men had richly earned any favors they got.
Perhaps the greatest goal of returning veterans and the spouses and fiancees who met them was stated by the couple who wanted to “Raise babies and keep house!” They did both with amazing speed. Many veterans married very quickly, and the new couples started to have babies. In May 1946, 9 months after the end of the war, 233,452 babies were born in the United States, up from 206,387 earlier that February. In June, the number of babies was 242,302, and in October, 339,499. A total of 3.4 million babies were born in the United States in 1946, 20 percent more than were born in 1945, a birthrate unmatched in the United States in decades, though it kept climbing after that.
The speed with which returning veterans chose to marry and have children came as quite a surprise. Nothing similar had followed other wars, certainly not World War I, even though “normalcy” had been a theme of the 1920s. Nevertheless, Americans across the spectrum of class and race started having children. The population soared, and a generation known as the baby boomers” became a demographic bulge whose sheer size affected many aspects of American life throughout boomer lifespans.
688 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
For white middle-class Americans, a new home located in a suburban neighborhood offered the chance to build a safe and modern life. It was to these new homes, cut off from daily interchange with their extended families but connected to others very much like themselves, that a generation of Americans moved after 1945.
Just as these new families were getting started, Abraham Levitt andhis sons William and Alfred bought 4,000 acres of potato farms in the town of Hempstead, Long Island, outside of New York City. On this huge parcel of land, the Levitts built Levittown, the largest private housing project in American history. Their plan was simple: clear the land, lay out curving roads or lanes (never streets), pour concrete slabs every 60 feet along these roadways, drop off a set of construction materials at each slab— composition rock-board and plywood—then send in construction crews armed with new power tools—saws, routers, and nailers—each of whom was assigned a specific step in the construction process. At the peak of production, 30 houses were built each day. Each had a 12- by 16-foot living room, one bathroom, two bedrooms, and a fireplace. Levittown eventually included 17,400 houses that were home to 82,000 people.
Occupants moved into the first houses in Levittown in October 1947. At first, houses were sold only to veterans but soon were sold also to other families. Modest down payments and Veterans Administration and Federal Housing Authority loans brought the price of $7,990 to $9,500 within the range of many middle-class and aspiring middle-class families. Long Island’s Levittown was so successful that the Levitts built two more planned communities near Philadelphia. Other developers—Del Webb in Phoenix, Joseph Kelly in Boston, Louis H. Boyar and Fritz B. Burns in Los Angeles—created similar developments that sold at an astounding pace. Between 1945 and 1960, 10 times as many houses were constructed in suburbs as in older central cities, and 95 percent of these houses were detached single family homes. Mass production that had come to automobiles in the earliest 1900s came to housing after 1945.
Architectural and social critics disliked suburban developments. The nation’s best known critic, Lewis Mumford, described suburbs as,
With the end of World War II, many Americans embraced a new image of domestic bliss in a suburban home filled with children.
a multitude of uniform, unidentifiable houses, lined up inflexibly, at uniform distances, on uniform roads, in a treeless communal waste, inhabited by people of the same class, the same income, the same age group, witnessing the same television performances, eating the same tasteless pre-fabricated foods, from the same freezers, confirming in every outward and inward respect to a common mold.
For veterans and their families and those who followed after them in the 1950s, however, the new suburbs were a dream come true. Immediately after the war, a desperate housing shortage led many to double up with parents or other relatives. Half a million veterans lived in army Quonset huts or other temporary buildings. Chicago sold 250 old trolley cars as temporary homes. A home of one’s own, previously often a reality only for the upper-middle class and the rich, now became a new norm. The first issue of the community newspaper in Levittown noted that “our lives are held closely together because most of us are within the same age bracket, in similar income groups, live in almost identical houses, and have common problems.” The residents also made their own contribution to the baby boom to such a degree that the community became known as Fertility Valley and the Rabbit Hutch.”
A house in a subdivision like Levittown, New York, was a key part of the American dream for many in the 1940s and 1950s.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created 6
242
242
POPULATION SHIFT
LOUISIANA
(13.5%)
FLORIDA
(46.1%)
Decrease
|	| Over 20% increase
□ 5%-20% increase KH Under 5% increase
MAP 24-1 Americans on the Move. Many Americans moved around a lot during and after World War II, and many settled in communities distant from where they had been children. While African-Americans moved from the South to the North in large numbers, accounting for much of the population growth in states like New York and Illinois, white Americans moved from East to West, especially to California, which grew by 53 percent between 1940 and 1950.
As many in the postwar generation moved to suburbia, Americans also moved from the East to the West. Between 1940 and 1950—the years of the war and the immediate postwar era—the Sunbelt grew rapidly. Texas grew by 20 percent, Nevada by 45 percent, and Arizona and California by over 50 percent (see Map 24-1). Soldiers and sailors coming through California on the way to the Pacific liked what they saw and vowed to return. However, not all young Americans could or wanted to participate in the rush either to the suburbs or to the West. African-Americans, Latinos, and Asians were excluded from most suburban developments. Levittown specifically excluded people of color from its subdivisions for the first 20 years of the community’s existence. William Levitt believed that if blacks were allowed to move in to Levittown, the whites would leave. He commented, “We can solve a housing problem, or we can try to solve a racial problem. But we cannot combine the two.” As late as 1960, not a single African-American lived among the 82,000 residents of Levittown, New York.
All-white developments like Levittown were not unique. Post-World War II suburbanization was a white affair that greatly exacerbated housing segregation in the United States. Urban communities had long been segregated. Most cities had their Irish, Italian, and Jewish neighborhoods as well as neighborhoods for African-Americans, and in the Southwest, for Latinos. However, the move to the suburbs meant that many whites left the cities and many nonwhites were left behind in core urban communities with a declining tax base, declining services, and declining opportunities.
Suburbia, however, was not an attraction for all Americans. Gay men and lesbians of any race were generally excluded from suburbia unless they chose to live deeply closeted lives. One lesbian wrote, “It has never been easy to be a lesbian in this country, but the 1950s was surely the worst decade in which to love your own sex.” Others simply preferred to stay in older urban neighborhoods or small towns. Women who worked, especially those who remained single or were divorced, often found the conformity of suburbia difficult. For the poets and playwrights who became the “beat generation” of the 1950s who celebrated nonconformity, suburbia was unthinkable. There was
690 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
thinking historically
Observations on Levittown and Other Suburbs
24.1
In June, 1958, a sociologist, Herbert J. Gans, and his wife were among the first 25 families to move into the new Levittown development just outside Philadelphia. They lived there for the next 2 years as "participant observers" in this brand new planned suburban development. Unlike many others who wrote about suburbia, Gans noted more positive than negative observations.
About the ways that living in Levittown impacted community and social life, one resident whom Gans interviewed said:
We didn't know before we moved here that we would entertain more, go out less. Not that we were boozehounds before, though. Not that we can't afford to go out; we just don't want to. We have a new house and want to keep it up nice; this is not work but enjoyment. I've never been more content... .Working in the yard is just like fishing, so relaxing.
I have more pep here.
Even if outside critics did not like what they saw in suburbia, Gans found that most of those who actually lived in Levittown did like it.
One major exception to the general sense of happiness was found among adolescents. Gans interviewed one girl who complained, "After school hours, you walk into an entirely different world. Everyone goes his own separate way, to start his homework, take a nap, or watch TV. This is the life of a vegetable, not a human being." As a result of the isolation, a car became as
important to adolescents as it was to adults. One high school senior took a job to buy a car and told Gans, "I had no choice, it was either going to work or cracking up....I'll start living. I can get out of Levittown.... In plain words, a boy shouldn't live here if he is between the ages of 14-17."
While he expected to find more boredom and depression among the sometimes-isolated residents of Levittown, he did not. Gans worried about the impact of suburbanization on older cities that were losing middle-class residents and their tax base leaving behind people of color—who generally didn't or couldn't move to the suburbs—and those who were poor. But in the end, he concluded, "I should like to emphasize once more that whatever its imperfections, Levittown is a good place to live."
Source: Herbert J. Gans, The Levittowners: Ways of Life and Politics in a New Suburban Community (New York: Vintage Books, 1967)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Gans explain the dissatisfaction many adolescents felt with suburban living?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Why do you think Gans found so many suburban residents content with their new communities while most other social critics found them so negative?

virtually no way to get around most suburbs without a car, and for those who needed public transportation, cities remained essential. Nevertheless, starting in 1945, great numbers of American men and women moved to the suburbs and embraced life there.
The Great Migration—African-Americans Move North
While white Americans moved to the suburbs, a new generation of African-Americans moved from the South to the North. The great migration of African-Americans to the North began during World War I, continued through the 1920s, and slowed during the Depression years of the 1930s (see Chapter 21). During and after World War II, the rate of migration exploded. By 1960, half of the nations African-Americans lived in northern cities—a huge change from the time when more than 90 percent of all blacks lived in the rural South. While the pull of northern industrial jobs and the push of southern segregation and violence remained constant from the 1920s to the 1950s, another factor accelerated the pace of movement in the late 1940s; the sharecropping system, around which the economic lives of many southern blacks had been organized
from the 1880s to the 1940s, began to disappear.
On October 2,1944, as the tide of war was turning, a crowd gathered at the Hopson
cotton plantation outside of Clarksdale, Mississippi, on Highway 49 to look at a new machine that had nothing to do with the war. Howell Hopson was conducting the first
Chapter 24 The World the War Created
public demonstration of a new International Harvester cotton picking machine. He described the scene: “An estimated 2,500 to 3,000 people swarmed over the plantation on that one day, 800 to 1,000 automobiles leaving their tracks and scars throughout the property.”
The machine that the visitors had come to see changed the face of the South and changed the lives of the nation’s African-Americans. The bright red picker looked like a tractor with a large metal basket on the top. As it drove down a row of cotton, the spindles mounted on the front rotated and stripped the cotton off the plants and then suctioned the cotton up to a basket. The picker could pick a thousand pounds of cotton in an hour; a good worker, only 20 pounds. Hopson said it cost $5.26 for a machine to pick a bale of cotton. A sharecropper cost $39.41 per bale. He wrote, The introduction of the cotton harvester may have been comparable to the unveiling of Eli Whitney’s first hand-operated cotton gin.”
Hopson was thinking of the machine’s impact on his profits. But like Whitney’s invention a century and a half earlier, the machine’s largest impact was on men and women of African descent. Whitney’s cotton gin made slavery profitable. International Harvester’s cotton picking machine made the sharecropping that had replaced slavery obsolete. A wave of 1.5 million African-Americans had moved North between 1910 and 1940, but 5 million followed between 1940 and 1960.
As people whose lives were centered in the communities, churches, and culture of the rigidly segregated South moved North, they now lived in quite different communities with changing norms. Racial discrimination, generally seen as a southern issue until World War II, became a national one. Nevertheless, opportunities in the North were better than those offered by sharecropping, and the newcomers created their own jobs and a new urban culture.
Housing in the North was even more segregated than in the South. While the Federal Housing Authority dropped explicit racial rules by the 1940s, its handbook still said, “If a neighborhood is to retain stability, it is necessary that all properties shall continue to be occupied by the same social class.” In reality, that wording meant, “Don’t give mortgages to black families in white neighborhoods.” The white rush to segregated suburbs opened up new urban housing for blacks. Unscrupulous real estate agents made large profits while engaging in blockbusting in older neighborhoods, convincing frightened white homeowners to sell quickly and cheaply. From Boston to Los Angeles, whole city blocks went on the market at the same time, transferring the majority of homes from white to black hands in short order. Changes in the racial makeup of urban neighborhoods happened at the same time as cash-strapped cities cut back on municipal services and many banks dramatically reduced the availability of mortgages and loans for home improvements. The creation of the white suburbs and the vastly expanded urban black ghettos went hand in hand in the 1950s.
Moving from the South to an unfamiliar North could be painful for African-Americans. In The Last Train North, Clifton Taulbert described the longing for things left behind:
There were no Chinaberry trees. No pecan trees....Never again would I pick dew berries or hear the familiar laughter from the field truck. This was my world now, this strange new family and their cramped quarters over the tiny grocery store they grandly called the “confectionary.”
Nevertheless, they kept coming through the 1940s and 1950s. As a migrant from Tennessee to Milwaukee said, Every train, every bus, they were coming.”
Many who arrived were disillusioned. When Harvey Clark, who originally hailed from Mississippi, tried to move his family from a crowded apartment in South Chicago to a larger one just across the city line in Cicero, he was greeted by a mob and a police chief who told him to “Get out of Cicero.” The chief told the agent who arranged the apartment, “Don’t come back in town, or you’ll get a bullet through
692 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
you.” The white mayor of Dearborn, Michigan, told Alabama’s Montgomery Advertiser that “Negroes can’t get in here. Every time we hear of a Negro moving in, we respond quicker than you do to a fire. As Detroit became a majority black city, its suburb of Dearborn remained 99 percent white.
Black migrants also found new freedoms and opportunities in the North. Ida Mae Brandon Gladney, who had never been able to vote in Mississippi, cast her first vote for Franklin Roosevelt in Chicago in 1940. (The black vote in Chicago carried the state of Illinois and, thus, the Electoral College for Roosevelt in that election.) Robert Joseph Pershing Foster, a physician in Louisiana, established a new practice in the rapidly expanding black community of Los Angeles in 1954 and 1955. Ihe several million other people making the move from the states of the Old Confederacy to New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and a hundred other cities in the North and West each had his or her own tale of the transformations taking place in every region of the country.
Latino Migrations from Puerto Rico and Mexico
As they had in the 1920s, African-American artists embraced urban life and the new growing black communities of the North, few more enthusiastically than musicians like Charlie Parker and Miles Davis, shown here performing in New York City in 1947.
While the great migration of African-Americans from the rural South to the urban North and West was occurring, migrations of Latino people were happening at the same time. Ihe United States had won control of Puerto Rico in 1898, and Puerto Ricans had long been American citizens. After World War II, more of these Spanish-speaking citizens began moving from Puerto Rico to the U.S. mainland, especially New York City. East Harlem, long an Italian neighborhood in New York City, quickly became mostly Puerto Rican. Piri Thomas was born in New York in 1928 and described the racial discrimination faced by a young adult in Spanish Harlem in the 1950s in his 1967 memoir aptly named Down These Mean Streets.
In addition, the U.S. population included about 1.2 million Americans of Mexican background, and this group also grew rapidly after World War II. In the Southwest, the bracero (helping hands in Spanish) began during World War II to allow Mexican farm workers temporary entry into the United States to work in the agricultural fields that other Americans had left for war industries or for the military. The entry program was expanded after the war, and between 1948 and 1964, almost 5 million braceros were brought to the United States. Although they were expected to return to Mexico when the work was done, not all did, and they, along with others who walked across the hot deserts and the border, expanded the country’s Mexican-American population, creating a large group, some of whom remained under constant threat of deportation.
In Southern California, growth led to new militancy in the Mexican-American community. In Santa Ana, Mexican-American parents hired an attorney and sued the Board of Education over school segregation. In 1946, the courts issued a permanent injunction against this segregation, and later, the federal appeals court directed a federal grand jury to consider an indictment against the Santa Ana board.
In Los Angeles, with the largest Mexican-American population, the Community Service Organization began to fight for political rights in 1947 and was successful in electing Edward Roybal to the Los Angeles City Council in 1949, the first time since 1881 that someone of Mexican descent had served on that body. In 1962, Roybal was elected to the U.S. Congress. Other Mexican-American organizations sprang up across the southwest, supporting a successful mine workers strike in New Mexico in 1950-1952 and building a solid base before the civil rights movements of the later 1950s while also supporting a small but growing middle-class Latino community in California and Texas.
Chapter 24 The World the War Created
24.1
United Nations
An international organization launched at the end of World War II with leadership from the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and China.
The United Nations and the New Economic Order
While Americans were moving around the country, the rest of the planet was also in transition. Even before World War II ended, a series of international gatherings reshaped the political and economic climate of the coming postwar world.
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND THE WORLD BANK
In 1944, leaders in the United States and Britain were determined not to repeat the mistakes of the Treaty of Versailles. Among those mistakes, they believed, were the huge reparations imposed on the defeated Germany and the failure of the victors to ensure robust economic activity after the war. In early 1944, Roosevelt’s Secretary of the Treasury Henry M. Morgenthau invited Great Britain and the Soviet Union to join the United States in establishing a postwar economic system. Both agreed. Morgenthau then invited representatives of more than 40 wartime allies to meet at the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in July 1944.
The resulting Bretton Woods agreement created an International Monetary Fund (IMF) for “promoting international monetary cooperation.” The purpose of the IMF was to maintain exchange rates between different currencies so people could buy and sell in different countries without fear that values would fluctuate wildly (as happened in the 1930s), to provide loans to a nation that was having problems balancing payments, and to provide technical assistance to banks. The U.S. dollar was made the base on which all other currencies were calculated (and it remained so until 1971).
The Bretton Woods delegates also created the International Bank for Reconstruction Development (better known as the World Bank) to get the world on stable economic footing as quickly as possible after the devastation of the war. The World Bank was designed to support economic recovery in war-torn Europe and to reduce world poverty, especially in Latin America, Africa, and parts of Asia that did not have the economic foundation for recovery. The first loans from the World Bank were made to war-torn France in 1947, and loans were soon extended around the world.
THE UNITED NATIONS
When Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill agreed to an Atlantic Charter in August 1941, they called for the “establishment of a wider and permanent system of general security” (see Chapter 23). By 1944, however, Roosevelt was ready to get more specific. He proposed an international body that would include every nation but in which the most powerful ones—in his proposal, the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union, and China—would serve as the “Four Policemen.” As he told reporters in the summer of 1944, if some aggressor “started to run amok,” these policemen would be needed to “stop them before they got started.” By 1944, the wartime alliance was calling itself the United Nations, and Roosevelt wanted to keep the name. The United States invited representatives from “the four policemen” to meet at a mansion known as Dumbarton Oaks in Washington, DC. In 7 weeks, from August to October 1944, Edward R. Stettinius, U.S. undersecretary of state; Andrey Gromyko, Soviet ambassador to the United States; and Sir Alexander Cadogan, permanent undersecretary in the British Foreign Office, consulting with V.K. Wellington Koo, the Chinese ambassador to London—with whom Gromyko refused to meet directly-erected the basic structure of what would become the United Nations (UN).They agreed that the core of the new organization would be a Security Council made up of five permanent members (France was added as a fifth member) and other delegates serving on a rotating basis. The Security Council would have the real power within the UN. A majority vote of the Security Council would be sufficient to authorize military force to stop aggression. Everyone also agreed that each of the core members of the Security Council should have a veto over any such actions; the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union were not about to allow sanctions of which they did not approve.
The planners also proposed a UN General Assembly that would permit all of the nations of the world to debate issues but that, unlike the Security Council, could not
$94 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
American Voices
United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
24.1
24.2
Three years after the United Nations was created, a UN Commission on Human Rights, chaired by former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt, proposed a Universal Declaration of Human Rights. By 1948, the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union was fully underway, and many UN meetings were little more than shouting matches. Few expected any productive results. But Eleanor Roosevelt was able to calm the waters enough to get the document approved. The final vote was 48 in favor, zero opposed, and 8 abstentions, including the Soviet Union. Roosevelt considered the adoption of the declaration to be her most important accomplishment. While the Universal Declaration of Human Rights had no enforcement mechanism, it set a new standard of international behavior against which every nation could be measured.
PREAMBLE
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people, Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law, Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in co-operation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge,
Now, Therefore THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY proclaims THIS UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations...
The document then includes a total of 30 articles that elaborate the points in detail.
Source: www.un.org/en/documents/index.shtml, downloaded May 19,2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How might the events of World War II have shaped this document?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What might explain the decision of the Soviet Union to abstain from voting on the Declaration?
243
■HI
enforce its resolutions. In addition, they agreed that there should be a secretary with a staff. Finally, they agreed that the new body should convene for the first time the following spring in San Francisco, California.
Roosevelt, mindful of Woodrow Wilson’s failure to take Republicans to Versailles, appointed a bipartisan delegation to go to San Francisco, including Republican Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan, one of the most respected members of the Senate. Vandenberg’s support would be crucial, and Roosevelt knew it.
Two weeks before the San Francisco meeting was to begin, Franklin D. Roosevelt died. Moments after taking the oath of office, Harry S. Truman made his first presidential decision: the conference would go ahead as scheduled on April 25. Some thought the San Francisco conference would simply be a celebration of work already done, but new tensions, especially between the United States and the Soviet Union, almost scuttled the conference. Nevertheless, most Americans wanted the United Nations to be successful, and public opinion influenced the delegates, especially Vandenberg. On June 25, 1945, the delegates unanimously approved the UN Charter. On July 28, the U.S. Senate ratified the charter by a vote of 89 to 2. The United Nations was launched.
Quick Review What were the most radical postwar changes domestically and internationally? Give three reasons to support each of your choices.
Chapter 24 The World the War Creates
24.1
24.2
243
Cold War
The political and economic confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States that dominated world affairs from 1946 to 1989.
THE COLD WAR BEGINS
Analyze the coming of the Cold War, tensions with the Soviet Union, and McCarthyism at home.
In 1945, most people in the United States admired the Soviet Union, even if American leaders had already become wary of Stalin and his government. After meeting Stalin for the first time at Tehran in late 1943, Roosevelt said, “I got along fine with Marshall Stalin.” Privately, however, he confided his doubts.
The two nations were allies in World War II. American wartime propaganda talked positively about “our valiant allies.” The Soviet people had withstood a murderous onslaught by Nazi forces and a terrible siege at Stalingrad. The Soviet army had done most of the fighting against Nazi Germany in World War II. Few Americans knew much about Stalin’s policies within Russia, including the deadly purges of political enemies or the mass starvation that resulted from efforts toward collectivist Russian agriculture in the 1930s. Yet within a year, the Soviet Union and the United States were engaged in a Cold War that lasted 40 years, until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the late 1980s. What happened to turn former allies against each other? And why did it happen so quickly?
The Hardening of Positions: Containment, the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, and the Berlin Airlift
From the beginning of their wartime alliance, the United States and the Soviet Union had very different goals in World War II. The Soviets wanted a permanent buffer zone between themselves and Germany, and they wanted to ensure that they obtained absolute control over the countries of Eastern Europe. Having suffered so much from the war, the Soviets were also determined to take all of the machinery, munitions, and art they could from Germany. The United States wanted a rapid
24.2
This picture of American and Soviet soldiers in Germany in May 1945, just after the Nazi surrender, illustrates the friendship between the people of the two nations that developed during World War II and that ended very soon after that.
>96 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
post-Nazi German recovery. In 1942, Roosevelt told Soviet Foreign Minister V. M. Molotov that, there might be a proper time” to address the differences in war goals between the two nations, but in the midst of the war, FDR said, "the present was not the moment.”
Within weeks of taking the oath of office, President Truman became convinced that the Soviets were violating promises they had made to Roosevelt and needed to be stopped. When he met with Foreign Minister Molotov for the first time, he was ready to show how tough an American president could be. When Molotov began the conversation with diplomatic chit chat, Truman immediately accused the Soviets of breaking promises they had made to FDR at the Yalta meeting. As Truman continued his tirade, Molotov responded, "I have never been talked to like that in my life,” to which Truman responded, ‘Carry out your agreements and you won’t get talked to like that. It was not an auspicious start to a new relationship. Truman later told friends, I gave him the one-two, right to the jaw.” Molotov and Stalin quickly concluded that Truman was reversing Roosevelt’s policies, especially when Truman cut aid to the Soviet Union, claiming that, with the war in Europe over, they no longer needed it. But Stalin did not back down. Indeed, almost immediately after the Truman-Molotov meeting, Stalin asserted Communist control over the new governments of Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria.
In spite of Truman’s tough tone with Molotov in April 1945, Truman knew that he had a weak hand in dealing with the Soviets. He sent one of Roosevelt’s most trusted advisors to Moscow to try to build a better relationship, and then in July for the first— and only—time, he met face to face with Stalin in Potsdam, just outside the newly conquered Berlin. Truman and Stalin seemed to get on, and after the Potsdam meeting, Truman wrote, "I can deal with Stalin.” The Americans agreed that Stalin had the right to dismantle factories in eastern Germany and move them to Russia and could arrange the government of Poland as he chose.
There were many reasons for these concessions. Most important, when the fighting in Europe ended, the Soviet army was in Eastern Europe and the American army was not. Truman knew that the American people had no stomach for maintaining an army in Europe after the war. Until the last day of the Potsdam meeting, Truman was not sure that the atomic bomb would work. Finally, with war still raging in the Pacific, Truman wanted the Soviets to keep their promise to attack Japan once the war in Europe was over.
In the year that followed the end of the war, however, both sides hardened their positions. In February and March 1946, new tensions flared. In a speech on February 9, Stalin said that the only key to future world peace was for “monopoly capitalism” to be replaced by Communism around the world. Supreme Court Justice William Douglas called Stalin’s speech a Declaration of World War III.”
A week later, George Kennan, a senior diplomat in the American embassy in Moscow, sent what came to be known as the “Long Telegram to the U.S. State Department. This widely distributed document called the Soviet government an “Oriental despotism” in which Communist ideology was merely a “fig-leaf’ covering tyranny at home and rapid expansion abroad. Kennan told his State Department superiors that the Soviet Union was a political force committed fanatically to the belief that with the United States there can be no permanent modus vivendi [accommodation between disputing parties], that it is desirable and necessary that the internal harmony of our society be destroyed, the international authority of our state be broken.” He suggested that the United States should adopt a policy of containment, acknowledging Soviet influence where it existed but taking all necessary steps to ensure that the influence did not spread into new areas of the globe. Containment of Soviet communism would come to define U.S. foreign policy for a long time.

243
containment
The policy of resisting further expansion of the Soviet bloc through diplomacy and, if necessary, military action, developed in 1947-48.
Chapter 24 The World the War Creati
24.1
24.2
243
iron curtain
A phrase coined by former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill in 1946 when describing the post-World War II division of Europe into two hostile segments.
Truman Doctrine
President Harry Truman's statement in 1947 that the United States should assist other nations that were facing external pressure or internal revolution.
Two weeks later, Winston Churchill, no longer in office but still a revered war hero, gave a speech as Truman’s guest at Westminster College in Missouri in which he said:
From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the continent. From what I have seen of our Russian friends and allies during the war, I am convinced that there is nothing they admire so much as strength, and there is nothing for which they have less respect than weakness, especially military weakness.
The image of an “iron curtain” dividing Europe became one of the central images of the Cold War. The call for military strength to counter Soviet strength became the foundation of a massive arms race on both sides of the iron curtain.
Not everyone in the United States agreed that a Cold War with the Soviet Union was inevitable. Three senators issued a statement saying, “Mr. Churchill’s proposal would cut the throat of the Big Three, without which the war could not have been won and without which the peace cannot be saved.” Former Vice President Henry Wallace, by then secretary of commerce, insisted that it was important for the United States to “allay any reasonable Russian grounds for fear, suspicion, and distrust.” Privately, Truman called these critics of Churchill’s speech “the American Crackpots Association.”
As 1946 came to an end, more Americans were coming to the conclusion that Stalin was an evil dictator and the Soviet Union could not be trusted. Truman decided that his administration needed to speak with a single voice and dropped Wallace and Secretary of State James Byrnes from the cabinet, replacing the latter with George Marshall, who was U.S. chief of staff during the war. A year later, Truman also sponsored a reorganization of the nation’s military forces in which the previously separate cabinet-level War and Navy departments were merged into a single Department of Defense that was responsible for all military matters. Truman was quickly concluding that the end of World War II did not mean the end of the need for U.S. military strength.
Meanwhile, in early 1947, Greece was in the midst of a civil war between its government and communist forces, and Turkey was resisting Soviet demands for greater control of access to the eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East. Great Britain, which had been providing support for both governments, said it could no longer afford to do so. Truman, Marshall, and Marshall’s deputy, Dean Acheson, agreed that the United States needed to step in to take Britain’s place in supporting resistance to communism in the region. If the containment policy meant anything, it certainly meant stopping Soviet moves into places like Greece and Turkey. The Truman Doctrine made it clear that containing communism would be at the bedrock of U.S. foreign policy. Needing the support of a reluctant Congress, Truman appeared in person and said, “I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures.”
In June, the administration announced plans for massive economic aid to western Europe. The winter of 1946-47 had been the worst in years. By spring, Europe was running dangerously low on coal and food. People were cold, hungry, and desperate. Secretary of State Marshall used a Harvard commencement speech to tell the world:
Marshall Plan
The European Recovery Program (1949), which provided U.S. economic assistance to European nations in large part to keep them out of the Soviet Union's sphere of influence.
Our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos....We know that in this trying period, between a war that is over and a peace that is not yet secure, the destitute and oppressed of the earth look chiefly to us for sustenance and support until they can again face life with self-confidence and self-reliance.
The speech was partly true. The humanitarian goals, a campaign against hunger, poverty and desperation, were real. But the Marshall Plan, as it came to be called, was also directed against one country and its doctrine. People in the United States and the Soviet Union knew that the goal was to stop Soviet expansion in Western Europe.
698 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
Congress funded $13.34 billion in U.S. aid for Europe between 1948 and 1952. People were fed, economies recovered, and western capitalist democracies were established.
Stalin saw the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan as a direct assault. Some Americans, notably the now-out-of-office Henry Wallace, also thought it was a needless provocation. The Soviets quickly solidified the power of a pro-Soviet regime in Hungary and arranged a pro-Soviet coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948. Then in June 1948, the Soviet Union closed off American, British, and French access to Berlin. Before World War II ended, the Soviet Union, Britain, the United States, and France had agreed that each of them would assume military authority not only in a different quadrant of Germany but also within a different quadrant in the city of Berlin, even though Berlin itself was deep inside the Soviet quadrant. The result was a divided Germany and a divided Berlin, a precarious situation especially for the former capital city (see Map 24-2).
The Soviets saw Berlin as a useful pressure point in the Cold War. By closing off western access to the city, they could challenge the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan. When they blocked all rail and highway access to Berlin in the spring of 1948, Truman decided to support the city with an airlift. In the days and weeks that followed, the Berlin Airlift sent hundreds of U.S. airplanes every day to Templehoff Airport in the western sector of Berlin. The city was well supplied and West Berlin withstood the siege. Eventually in May 1949, the Soviet Union relented and reestablished access to Berlin. Nevertheless, by the beginning of 1949, the iron curtain that Churchill had described was more firmly in place than ever, and the Cold War, which had been developing since 1945, was a reality.
24.2
Berlin Airlift
In 1948 and 1949, food and supplies delivered by air into Berlin to keep the city attached to western Europe.
1949—The Soviet Atom Bomb and the Fall of China
Just as the crisis in Berlin was coming to an end, the U.S. Senate ratified American membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), by an 82 to 13 vote in July 1949. Fearing a Soviet invasion of western Europe, 12 nations, led by the United States and Britain, created the NATO alliance, in which each member agreed to treat an attack on any one from any source—though only one source was feared—as an attack on all. There would be no repeat by any country of Nazi Germany’s attacks on the nations of Europe, one after another. The NATO treaty was the first time in history that the United States agreed to such a peacetime partnership.
Virtually nonstop flights brought vital supplies to the city of Berlin and sustained it during its isolation from June 1948 until May 1949.
Chapter 24 The World the War Ci
i “h
MAP 24-2 A Divided Germany. With the end of World War II, American, British, French, and Soviet forces each controlled a portion of Germany and a portion of the German capital city of Berlin as well as temporarily Austria. The arrangement would soon lead to a new crisis.
700 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
IB
Members of NATO (1949) M88
Members of Warsaw Pact (1955) Hi Nonaligned counties (D Participants in the Marshall Plan, 1947-1952 Year first atomic device was tested by that country
Map^s’a Wvided Europe. As the Cold War escalated, countries within NATO and those within the Warsaw Pact, with few neutral nations, made up the new Europe.
Chapter 24 The World the War O
:oi
In 1955, when the Federal Republic of Germany, or West Germany, was created out of the merged British, French, and U.S. occupation zones and admitted to NATO, the Soviet Union formed the Warsaw Pact—a military alliance in eastern Europe specifically designed to counter NATO with the same guarantees of mutual assistance for its members, all of whom were under tight control by the Soviet Union. NATO and the Warsaw Pact would be more powerful entities in the coming decades than the United Nations (see Map 24-3).
Two further events in the fall of 1949 sped the growth of Cold War sentiment in the United States. First, in August, the Russians exploded their own atomic bomb. Then, soon after the announcement of Soviet nuclear capacity, the government of the U.S. wartime ally Chiang Kai-shek was defeated by Chinese communists. The creation of the Communist People’s Republic of China under the leadership of Mao Tse-tung and the flight of Chiang’s government to the island of Taiwan was a huge blow to American pride even though the United States continued to recognize the Taiwan-based government as the official voice of China until the 1970s. Chiang s government had been an important symbol to Americans since the Japanese invasion of China in the 1930s, and the United States had spent almost $3 billion to help Chiang since the end of World War II. Americans had tended to ignore the corruption and inefficiency of Chiang’s Nationalist government. An internal U.S. State Department paper written in August 1949 just before the fall of Chiang’s government said, The unfortunate but inescapable fact is that the ominous result of the civil war in China was beyond the control of the government of the United States.” However, many Americans— in Congress, in the media, and around the country—were convinced that the United States had somehow “lost China” and that the Truman administration was at fault. It was a sour time in a country which was not used to losses.
The Cold War at Home—Joseph McCarthy and a New Red Scare
As Americans tried to make sense of the Cold War, the Soviet manufacture of an atomic bomb, and the Communist takeover in China, some in Congress and beyond looked for internal enemies. Many politicians were worried about maintaining the security of the United States, but some in Congress sought political gain by fomenting a new Red Scare similar to the one that had followed World War I (see Chapter 21).
On January 21, 1950, Alger Hiss, a former State Department official who had been with FDR at Yalta and who helped organize the United Nations, was accused of having been a spy for the Soviets in the 1930s. One week later, Klaus Fuchs, an atomic scientist, was arrested in London and accused of turning over nuclear secrets to the Soviets. Fuchs implicated several Americans, including David Greenglass, Greenglass’s sister Ethel Rosenberg, and her husband Julius Rosenberg. And little more than a week after the arrest of Fuchs, Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy gave a speech in Wheeling, West Virginia, in which he claimed to have a list of active Communist Party members who worked for the federal government. People began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere. The nation was in for 5 years of fear and suspicion.
Reality was more complex than the picture of widespread subversion implied. Although the Communist Party in the United States was tiny, thousands of Americans had considered communism as an alternative to the nation’s battered economic system in the 1930s. In addition, during World War II, the Soviet Union was the America’s close ally in the fight against Nazi Germany. Before 1945, no one could have anticipated that helping the Soviets would be such a serious crime later in the decade.
Like many State Department officials, Alger Hiss was from the highest social strata, making him an ideal choice for those who wanted to whip up class resentment as well as anticommunism. When Hiss was accused of passing state secrets to the Soviets, he insisted on testifying under oath in front of Congress, a move that opened Hiss to a charge of libel, and even though he was never convicted of espionage, he was eventually convicted of lying under oath to Congress and served 3 years in prison. More recently available documents make it clear that Hiss had, indeed, probably been a communist in the 1930s, but when politicians like Republican Representative Karl Mundt of South Dakota said that the conviction proved that the United States “had been run by New Dealers, Fair Dealers, Misdealers and Hiss dealers” they were lumping an awful lot of other people who had never even flirted with communism in the same category. Mundt s comment did prove that, in many parts of the United States,
702 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
Senator Joseph McCarthy lectured widely on the Communist menace. Although he gave few details, he successfully created great fear. In this image, he exhibits a photograph that he claims is evidence of communist infiltration during a Senate investigation in 1954.
deep resentment of the New Deal and of the eastern elite was alive and well and could easily be linked with each other and both could be linked with fears of the growing international influence of communism in the late 1940s.
Greenglass and the Rosenbergs were investigated in 1950 and charged with being Soviet spies and with passing on atomic secrets to the Soviets in 1951. Greenglass worked at the top-secret Manhattan Project, and Julius Rosenberg was a wartime engineer, and both had access to highly secret data. They were also Jewish, and even though Americans were horrified by the Holocaust, anti-Semitism was alive and well in the United States in 1950. Just as Hiss suffered for his East Coast elite status,
Greenglass and the Rosenbergs suffered for their Jewish background. In the end, Greenglass served a long prison term. Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, who always maintained their innocence, were executed in 1953, the only Americans ever executed under the 1917 Espionage Act.
(In the 1990s, when Soviet archives were opened and when another one of the accused coconspirators, Morton Sobell admitted that he had, indeed, been a spy, it seemed
clear that at least Julius, if not Ethel, had been Soviet spies.) It was also clear that, in the atmosphere of 1950 and 1951, it was virtually impossible for them to get a fair trial.
Senator Joseph McCarthy was not the first elected official to try to make political gains by stirring up the fear of communism (in fact he came late to the process), but he stole the leadership from all the others. He had been searching for a new political issue on which to build his reelection campaign in Wisconsin, and in February 1950, he thought he had found it when he heard the national reaction to a speech in which he said, “I have here in my hand a list of 205—a list of names that were made known to the Secretary of State as being members of the Community Party who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the State Department.”
McCarthy was far more interested in his own fame than in actually finding communists. His Senate colleagues knew him as a pathological liar who had lied about his military service (he said he had flown 30 combat missions when he had flown none; his limp was not from shrapnel, as he claimed, but from a fall), and he embarrassed them. He drank heavily, fanned the flames of homophobia, and attacked both Republicans and Democrats whom he thought were “soft on communism.” Nevertheless, few were willing to challenge McCarthy while the country was caught up in the fear of communism.
McCarthy said, “The government is full of Communists.” He also said that Acheson’s predecessor, George Marshall, had “lost” China. For those who believed that only a conspiracy could have led to the growth of communist influence around the world, McCarthy was the perfect voice. In June 1951, he told one audience:
How can we account for our present situation unless we believe that men high in this government are concerting to deliver us to disaster? This must be the product of a conspiracy, a conspiracy on a scale so immense as to dwarf any previous such venture in the history of man.
Only treason in high places could account for the nation s troubles as McCarthy described them.
McCarthy never did name the names on his list, and the numbers kept shifting in different speeches, but he ruined careers and frightened many into silence. His pop-ularity seemed to protect him. In May 1950, a Gallup poll showed that 84 percent of Americans knew who McCarthy was and 39 percent believed that his attacks were
Chapter 24 The World the War Cre;
House Committee on Un-American Activities
Congressional committee (1938-1975) that investigated suspected Nazi and Communist sympathizers.
good for the country. Few political leaders were willing to challenge him. However, in June 1950, Maine’s Republican Senator Margaret Chase Smith and six colleagues issued a “Declaration of Conscience,” saying that McCarthy was using the Senate as a “publicity platform for irresponsible sensationalism. Still, he continued for 4 more years.
When he became president in 1953, Eisenhower did not challenge McCarthy directly, but helped those who wanted to undermine him. In 1954, Edward R. Murrow, perhaps the most respected journalist in the country, did an expose on McCarthy on his “See It Now” program on CBS television. Both the Senate declaration and the CBS program hurt McCarthy’s reputation, but it was only when McCarthy decided to probe for communists in the U.S. Army that he met his match. As the army s attorney Joseph Welch grilled him, McCarthy lashed out at a young attorney who was assisting Welch, accusing him of being a Communist because he was a member of the left-leaning National Lawyers Guild. Welch exploded, “Until this moment Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness.” The hearing room burst into applause. After that, on December 2,1954, the Senate voted to condemn McCarthy by a vote of 67 to 22. He continued to serve out his term until his death in 1957, but he was a beaten man and no longer a force in national politics.
McCarthy was hardly the only leader of the Red Scare of the late 1940s and early 1950s. J. Edgar Hoover, who had been head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) since 1924 and a participant in the government’s attack on radicals after World War I, cultivated a reputation as the nation’s top crime fighter, especially after FBI agents killed John Dillinger, “Public Enemy Number One,” during Prohibition. But Hoover also cultivated a role as a leading anti-Communist, seeking to expose what he claimed was communist influence in the government, universities, religious groups, and later civil rights organizations. He collected files on hundreds of Americans, from members of Congress to union officials. Although President Truman complained about Hoover, insisting, “We want no Gestapo or Secret Police,” he did not stop Hoover’s search for subversives.
Other politicians realized that the search for Communists could lead to electoral success. The House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC) became a powerful forum for those who used the fear of communism to pursue other agendas. One of its members, John Rankin, a Democrat from Mississippi linked communism, Jews, and civil rights workers, saying of the Civil Rights Movement, “This is part of the communistic program, laid down by Stalin approximately 30 years ago. Remember communism is Yiddish. I understand that every member of the Politburo around Stalin is either Yiddish or married to one, and that includes Stalin himself.” A young Republican Representative from California, Richard M. Nixon, used HUAC to build a national reputation, investigating Hiss, looking for communists in the government, and extending the search into the entertainment industry and education.
While some in the entertainment world quickly cooperated with HUAC, many fought back. Judy Garland, one of the nation’s most popular stars since her childhood role in the Wizard of Oz, pleaded, “Before every free conscience in America is subpoenaed, please speak up!” Frank Sinatra asked, “Once they get the movies throttled .. .how long will it be before we’re told what we can say and cannot say into the radio microphone? If you make a pitch on a nationwide radio network for a square deal for the underdog, will they call you a Commie?.. .Are they going to scare us into silence?” Undeterred, HUAC continued with its hearings. Many witnesses refused to testify on the Fifth Amendment grounds that they could not be compelled to testify against themselves. Ten actors, known as the Hollywood Ten, took the more difficult route of claiming that the hearings threatened their First Amendment rights of free speech. The 10 and others were blacklisted and had their careers ruined, in spite of efforts by the Committee for the First Amendment led by Humphrey Bogart, Lauren Bacall, Katherine Hepburn, and Danny Kaye to protect them.
704 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
thinking historically
Looking at the Art of the Postwar Nation
f—
! 2<U i
j
24.2
In his book, the Unfinished City: New York and the Metropolitan idea, historian Thomas Bender wrote of the radical transformation of the arts after World War II, "Intellectual historians have failed to grasp the variety of artistic and critical work that characterized the 1940s, partly because concerns of the Cold War era gave precedence to certain ideological themes and political trends." Bender argues that it is also important to pay attention to the "remarkable creativity and critical discourse in the fields of painting and sculpture, photography, architecture, music, and dance."
As Bender observes, while many Americans were focused on the Cold War, others were using the arts to ask different questions about American life, especially as people came to terms with the threat of nuclear disaster after World War II. Often, artists were pointing to the confusions—some said pointlessness—of contemporary thinking as much or more than they were making overt statements about one political ideology or another.
James Agee, himself a very well-known author, was the film critic for the Nation magazine in the late 1940s. In a 1948 review, he wrote:
Several of the best people in Hollywood grew, noticeably, during their years away at war; the man who grew most impressively, I thought, as an artist, as a man, in intelligence, and in an ability to put through fine work against difficult odds, was [film director] John Huston... .His first movie since the war has been a long time coming, but it was certainly worth waiting for. The Treasure of the Sierra Mad re is... a bout as near to folk art as a highly conscious artist can get....I doubt we shall ever see a film more masculine in style; or a truer movie understanding of character and of men.
As a generation of young men returned from the fighting of the war and took up their day-to-day lives in the civilian workforce, some worried that perhaps they had left their masculinity
behind on the battlefields. Artists, like the film director John Huston, addressed these fears. While the films of the late 1940s and early 1950s were, like al, films, meant to entertain, they also helped some in the audience think through some of their greatest hopes and fears.
The abstract artist Jackson Pollock painted Convergence in 1952. Like most abstract art, the complex work leaves it to the beholder to make meaning of the lines and colors the artist offers.
Source: Thomas Bender, Unfinished City: New York and the Metropolitan Idea (New York: New York University Press, 2002), pp. 135-136; James Agee, "The Treasure of the Sierra Mad re," The Nation, January 31,1948.
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
In your opinion, what can a period's art tell us about its politics? What sort of political ideas might one see in an abstract painting or a film about masculinity?
2.	Constructing an Argument
How would you explain the emergence of abstract art in the era of the atomic bomb after World War II in place of the much more realistic paintings of the 1930s?
t	...
j
Many labor unions purged communist members. Aspiring new leaders used the accusation of communist influence to push aside older leaders. The United Electrical Workers union was replaced by a new union of electrical workers because the United Electrical was considered to be communist and was expelled by the American Federation of Labor. Civil Rights organizations, including the Urban League, the Congress of Racial Equality, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), purged communist members. Many school districts and 21 states required loyalty oaths from teachers. In 1948, the University of Washington fired three professors when they refused to answer questions about the Communist Party. Some 31 professors were ultimately fired from the University of California under similar circumstances. And the American Federation of Teachers, the leading union of elementary and secondary teachers, voted that communists should not be allowed to be members or teach in the nation’s schools.
Chapter 24 The World the War Crei
i
Not everyone was caught up in the Red Scare hysteria. Philip Murray, president of the Congress of Industrial Organizations, one of the nation s largest unions, wrote to President Truman in 1947 to protest that government policy did not ensure due process for accused employees. Secretary of the Treasury John Snyder protested the government’s Loyalty Review Board in 1948.
George Kennan, who had played an important role in launching the Cold War, added a somber note in his Memoirs: “What the phenomenon of McCarthyism did... was to implant in my consciousness a lasting doubt as to the adequacy of our political system....I could never recapture after these experiences of the 1940s and 1950s, quite the same faith in the American system of government and in traditional American outlooks that I had, despite all the discouragements of official life, before that time. Not everyone shared Kennan’s pessimism, but many felt that American democracy itself had been wounded by the tactics of people like McCarthy.
War in Korea
On June 25, 1950, to the surprise of U.S. leaders, the army of North Korea attacked South Korea. Korea was a part of the world to which U.S. planners had paid very little attention. But it was the place where the Cold War turned very hot.
With the Japanese defeat in 1945, the victorious allies determined to honor Korean hopes for independence. U.S. military authorities used the same formula as they had for Germany: a divided military occupation that was meant to be temporary. Military planners agreed that the Soviet army would occupy Korea north of the 38th parallel (North Korea) and that U.S. forces would occupy the southern half of the peninsula, including the old capital of Seoul (South Korea), until a permanent plan for national unification could be achieved. It would be a long wait.
The United States backed a new government led by the 75-year-old Syngman Rhee, who was conservative, charming, fiercely independent, as well as corrupt and dictatorial. The Soviets backed an even more dictatorial 31-year-old communist, Kim Il-Sung. Both Rhee and Kim were committed to Korean unification, but on very different terms. Between the end of World War II and 1950, constant clashes between the two governments cost perhaps 100,000 Koreans their lives.
Then, in 1949 and 1950, a crisis developed. In 1949, the Soviet delegate to the United Nations, Jacob Malik, began boycotting the UN Security Council because that body continued to give the Nationalist Chinese government of Chiang Kai-shek the UN vote even though the Communist government ruled mainland China. Ihe protest meant that the Soviet Union could not veto Security Council resolutions at a crucial moment.
At the same time, the Truman administration, worried that the United States was spread too thin, and seeing Korea as of only marginal significance, withdrew the U.S. military, leaving Rhee’s government on its own. A year later in 1950, in a speech he later regretted, Secretary of State Dean Acheson described the U.S. “defensive perimeter” in Asia in a way that did not include either Korea or Taiwan. Stalin and the North Korean dictator Kim Il-Sung assumed that the United States was not prepared to defend South Korea. Kim pressed Stalin to approve an attack and Stalin agreed, though he warned Kim, “[I]f you get kicked in the teeth, I shall not lift a finger.” It was all the permission Kim needed. On June 25, 100,000 North Korean troops, supported by tanks, artillery, and planes, invaded the South.
The Communist leaders had misread U.S. intentions. Truman viewed the Korean invasion through the prism of British and French inaction in the face of Nazism. He was determined to maintain the Truman Doctrine of containment of communism anywhere in the world. With the Soviets absent, Acheson appealed to the United Nations Security Council and got a unanimous vote in favor of UN action to stop the North Koreans. The Korean War was called a UN police action, although nearly all of the fighting was done by U.S. and Korean troops.
706 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
Public opinion polls showed solid support for American action, and people as diverse as Republican Governor of New York Thomas Dewey and liberal Henry Wallace (both of whom had run against Truman in the 1948 presidential election) supported Truman. Congress appropriated $10 billion.
Truman ordered General Douglas MacArthur, then commander of U.S . troops occupying Japan, to take command in Korea, and troops were rushed to Korea. Meanwhile, the North Koreans kept coming. By September, 3 months after the war began, U.S. and South Korean forces controlled only a small section of southeast Korea around the port of Pusan, known as the Pusan perimeter. Slowly, however, the U.S. forces were built up and supplies brought into Korea. American planes bombed North Korean troops heavily. The bombing wreaked havoc on Communist supply lines but also destroyed rice fields. Perhaps half the invading North Korean army were killed or wounded in the first 2 months of the war, and most of the North Korean tanks were disabled. Two to three million Korean civilians, 10 percent of the prewar population of Korea, died during the war either from bombing or from starvation because of lost rice crops.
In September 1950, under MacArthur’s command, the U.S. and UN forces made a surprise amphibious landing at Inchon, on the west coast of Korea close to the 38th parallel. The Communist forces were cut off from their supplies and captured or forced to retreat. The tide of war suddenly turned, and in less than a month, the Americans advanced from the small perimeter to retake South Korea (see Map 24-4).
For MacArthur, the initial victory was only the beginning. He insisted, and Truman agreed, that the moment had come to unify the whole Korean peninsula under Syngman Rhee. The UN, with the Soviets still boycotting, agreed and MacArthur’s forces began moving north, closer to the Chinese border at the Yalu River. MacArthur was confident that he could win the war and be home by December. When Truman asked about the chance of a Chinese intervention, Mac Arthur responded, “Very little.” He was wrong.
By late November, as MacArthur’s army continued north, a huge Chinese army attacked them. “The Chjnese have come in with both feet,” Truman said. This time it was the Americans that had long drawn-out supply lines. They
were ill prepared for the freezing cold of a Korean winter. The Chinese wore warm, padded clothing, had fought for years in similar territory, and were adept at terrifying hand-to-hand night fighting when American planes and troops could not see them. The fighting in November and December of 1950 was brutal. Soldiers were killed as they slept or froze in the winter cold. The retreats were frightful. The U.S. Army Seventh Infantry Division lost 5,000 troops, one-third of its force, in a 3-day retreat over mountainous roads as the Chinese attacked from every angle. By January 1951, the line dividing the two armies was well south of the 38th parallel. The war settled into a bloody stalemate.
For Truman, the defeats in Korea at the end of 1950 were a diplomatic and a political disaster. Republicans now saw him as weak. Some urged the use of atomic weapons on China. General MacArthur, whom Truman despised, had strong Republican support. (MacArthur’s fellow senior officers had their own opinions. When General Eisenhower was asked if he had met MacArthur he responded, “Not only have I met him... .1 studied dramatics under him.”) In early 1951, MacArthur bypassed Truman and tried to get congressional support for a wider war.
Truman had had enough. With support from the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he fired MacArthur, who had been a hero to many. Army Chief of Staff General Omar Bradley was more concerned with Europe and fearful of a land war in Asia. Bradley said Korea was the “wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with
U.S. troops bogged down in the snow and cold of Korea found the war far r difficult to fight than had been expected.
Chapter 24 The World the War Crea
CHINA
U . S . S . R .
M
North Korea Mil South Korea North Korean forces
»*« United States (United Nations) forces Chinese forces ® Capitals
MAP 24-4 The Korean War. At the beginning and end of the Korean war, the peninsula was divided into two nations at the 38th parallel. However, between 1950 and 1953, the dividing line moved many times as indicated.
the wrong enemy.” The new commander in Korea, General Matthew Ridgway, stabilized the defense lines and arranged better support and supplies for the troops.
The Chinese and American governments became resigned to a partial victory. Neither wanted a larger war, no matter what the two Korean governments thought. Battles for places the American troops called “Heartbreak Ridge,” or “No-Name Ridge,” described how those on the ground thought about what they were doing. Armistice negotiations began in the summer of 1951, but stalled over the fact that many Chinese and North Korean prisoners did not want to be returned home. It would take 2 more years, and the election of a new U.S. president, before the final armistice was signed in July 1953. More than 36,000 Americans were killed in the war, many times more Korean and Chinese troops, and probably 3 million Korean civilians. The final armistice line was not far from where the prewar line had been near Panmunjom. Sixty years later, Korea is still a tense and divided place.
24.2
Quick Review How did changing attitudes toward, and experiences with, the Soviet Union between 1945 and 1949 contribute to major changes in U.S. foreign policy?
708 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
POLITICS, 1948 AND 1952
Explain political developments that led to the elections of Truman and then Eisenhower as Cold War era presidents.
When Harry Truman became president in April 1945, few Americans knew much about him. Many expected Truman to merely serve out the term to which Roosevelt had been elected. Truman decided otherwise, but he had a lot of time and a lot of responsibility to manage before any thought of reelection loomed.
Riding A Tiger—Truman's First Term
As war and foreign policy dominated Trumans first months in office, Truman said he felt like he was riding a tiger. The liberal wing of the Democratic Party included New Deal activists such as Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace and Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes who never trusted Truman, viewing him as a product of Missouri machine politics who had been forced on FDR by the conservative wing of the party. Truman reciprocated the distrust. Looking ahead to the postwar world, Truman told Clark Clifford, one of his key advisors, “I don t want any experiments. The American people have been through a lot of experiments, and they want a rest from experiments.” But Truman was not proposing any sort of Warren Harding “normalcy.”
On September 6, 1945, just 4 days after the Japanese surrender, Truman proposed legislation that would implement FDR’s Economic Bill of Rights, expanding the federal role in public housing, public utilities, job creation, and national health, increasing the minimum wage, offering Social Security benefits to more people, while also making the Fair Employment Practices Commission permanent. It was a sweeping agenda, delighting liberals and dismaying conservatives. Southern segregationists filibustered the fair employment bill that would have continued FDR’s executive order, ensuring that employers with federal contracts could not discriminate among employees on the basis of race, and kept it from reaching a vote. Other bills were watered down by Congress. Congress turned Truman’s effort to launch a national system of health insurance into the Hill-Burton Act that benefitted doctors and hospitals and private medical insurers, but did not guarantee health insurance.
While there was Democratic as well as Republican opposition to Truman’s domestic agenda, the president’s single most powerful opponent was Ohio Senator Robert Taft, the son of the former president, known to many as “Mr. Republican.” Taft not only opposed Truman’s agenda but also pushed legislation that reduced taxes, forcing cuts in government programs, and persuaded Congress in 1947, over Truman’s veto, to pass the Taft-Hartley Act that lifted many of the protections organized labor had enjoyed since the passage of the Wagner Act in the 1930s.
Taft was not alone. The Republican Party was strong following World War II. As Truman understood, many people in the United States were tired of experiments, just as after World War I, many Americans simply wanted to be left alone. In the 1946 midterm elections, Republicans took control of both houses of Congress. But Harry Truman was a fighter, more of a fighter than some expected. His goal was to win a full term in his own right and elect a Democratic Congress in 1948, goals many thought unrealistic in 1946. The 1948 Election—A Four-Way Contest
In planning his campaign for 1948, Truman sought to maintain the New Deal coalition that had elected Roosevelt four times, and even sought to expand it. He wanted to have a large plurality among white blue-collar workers, immigrant groups, farmers, and poor people. He made special efforts to court African-Americans and Jews. In 1946, he appointed a President’s Committee on Civil Rights and its report, released in October 1947, led him to propose an antilynching law, a permanent fair employment commission, and laws against poll taxes and discrimination in transportation.
243
When the Republican Congress failed to pass these and other pieces of legislation, Truman called them “the do-nothing Congress.” Under pressure from civil rights leaders, Truman overruled the objections of some of the nations highest-ranking military officers and ordered the desegregation of the nations armed forces in 1948. It would take several years before the last segregated regiments were phased out, but the process was underway for a dramatic change from the segregated military of World War II.
Truman also favored the establishment of an independent state of Israel. On this issue, there was deep disagreement within the administration. Secretary of State Marshall threatened to resign if the United States gave support to Israel, and most leaders of the State, Army, and Navy departments opposed recognizing the new nation. They feared that the United States would permanently alienate the Arab world, jeopardize the smooth flow of oil to the United States and Europe, and create a situation that would remain tense and untenable. Those on the White House staff tended to support creation of a Jewish state in the Middle East. Truman’s own reading about the Holocaust and Middle Eastern history led him to support Israel. He got—and occasionally resented— considerable pressure from American Zionists. Thirty-three state legislatures passed resolutions favoring the establishment of a Jewish state. Truman responded to one anxious State Department official, “I have to answer to hundreds of thousands who are anxious for the success of Zionism. I do not have hundreds of thousands of Arabs among my constituents.” On May 14, as the last British forces left Palestine, Zionists proclaimed the independent state of Israel. At Truman’s direction, the United States immediately recognized the new government. To the surprise of many, Israel was able to defend itself successfully against an Arab attack and secure its borders and its existence.
Truman’s policies from fair employment to his support for Israel also had an impact on American voters. While many African-Americans were moving into the Democratic Party and most Jewish voters were prepared to support Truman after his May 1948 decisions, the road to nomination and election that year was not easy. Many New Dealers in the Democratic Party still hoped for a more liberal or a more popular candidate.
When it became clear that Truman would win the nomination—and invite Senate leader Alben Barkley to be his running mate—Henry Wallace, former vice president and commerce secretary, bolted and set up the Progressive Party to defeat Truman, end the Cold War, and return the country to what he saw as the Roosevelt legacy.
Then, when Truman supported a convention platform plank supporting civil rights, introduced by Minnesota Senator Hubert Humphrey at the Democratic convention, 35 delegates from Alabama and Mississippi walked out of the convention waving Confederate flags and proceeded to nominate South Carolina’s governor and future senator J. Strom Thurmond to run against Truman. These “Dixiecrats” were a serious threat to a party that always counted on the “solid South” to ensure national electoral victories.
The Republicans, sensing that this was their year, especially with the divisions in the Democrat ranks, nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York, the 1944 standard bearer, with California Governor Earl Warren as his running mate. The team seemed to have everything going for it and ran a cautious campaign designed to avoid mistakes. Unfortunately for the Republicans, they were too cautious and Dewey was too stiff. Alice Longworth, Theodore Roosevelt’s daughter, called him, “the little man on the wedding cake.” The Wallace campaign never took off and gained little support though it may have denied Truman the majority in a few crucial states, especially New York. The Thurmond campaign got virtually no support outside of the Deep South though it did carry the electoral votes of four states Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. Truman waged a very tough and spirited campaign against the “do-nothing Congress” and the “Wall Street reactionaries.” As he campaigned, people started yelling, “Give em hell, Harry!” He had solid support from organized labor and farmers and held most of the New Deal coalition together. Still, the Republicans, led by Dewey, were confident of victory. But when the votes were counted, Truman won, receiving 24,179,345 votes to Dewey’s 21,991,291, and 303 electoral votes to Dewey s 189. Thurmond won 39 electoral votes. Wallace none.
710 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
As he began his new term in January 1949, Truman called his agenda the Fair Deal. The Truman Fair Deal included repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act, support for family farmers, a more progressive income tax, federal aid to education, an increase in the minimum wage, national medical insurance as well as another try to broadening Social Security, and expanded civil rights. In his inaugural address, Truman also called for more U.S. technical assistance to developing countries. Technical assistance became known as Point Four because it was the fourth point in Truman’s speech.
Even though the Democrats controlled both houses of Congress in 1949, virtually none of the Fair Deal legislation passed. Southern Democrats made sure there was no movement on civil rights, organized labor did not have enough support to overturn the Taft-Hartley Act, urban representatives saw little value in spending federal tax money on farmers, and the American Medical Association made sure that there was no national system of medical insurance such as most western European countries adopted after World War II. Point Four foreign aid passed, but the appropriations were small and the resulting technical assistance generally insignificant. Much of Truman’s second term was focused on the war in Korea—which the Congress
was willing to fund—and the ongoing Red Scare, which Truman did little to oppose.
Many were confident of a Republican victory in the 1948 election, including the editors of the Chicago Tribune, who published this erroneous early edition over which the eventual winner, Harry S. Truman, delighted to gloat.
A
War Hero Becomes President In a belated slap at Franklin Roosevelt, the Republican Congress passed the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution prohibiting any president from serving more than two terms, and a majority of states ratified the amendment. The amendment did not apply to the sitting president, and Truman considered seeking a third term. When he was defeated in the first primaries by Estes Kefauver, a crusading senator from Tennessee, however, Truman decided that two terms was enough and dropped out of the race. In spite of his spirited come-from-behind race in 1948 and his later reputation as a tough decision maker, Truman was not a widely popular president.
The most popular person in the United States in the early 1950s was Dwight David Eisenhower, known to everyone as Ike. Born in 1890 and raised in Abilene, Kansas by pacifist parents, Eisenhower had attended West Point, seeing it as a free education for a career in engineering. Instead, he became a long-term officer in the peacetime army between the wars, moving slowly through the ranks. He was still a colonel when World War II began, but was then promoted rapidly and commanded the Allied force that defeated Nazi Germany. He probably could have had the presidential nomination of either party in 1948 but opted to become president of Columbia University and then commander of NATO forces in Europe in 1951. He managed to convey a disinterested, “above the fray” persona. Some who knew him better saw another side. General George Patton said, “Ike wants to be President so badly you can taste it.”
While Eisenhower had served as a senior military commander under Democrats Roosevelt and Truman—and tended to agree with the anti-Communist wing of the Democratic Party on foreign policy matters, he was a fiscal conservative, and the New Deal and Fair Deal programs offended his sense of the proper role of the federal government. If he was going to run, it would be as a Republican. Liberals within the Republican Party, including the 1944 and 1948 standard bearer Thomas Dewey and Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, were desperate to find an internationalist” candidate who could stop the Republican front-runner, Senator Taft, an isolationist in foreign policy and a conservative on domestic issues. They courted Eisenhower who remained coy. However, primary voters made it clear that they preferred Ike to Taft: Ike defeated Taft 46,661 to 35,838 in the March New Hampshire primary even though he was still at NATO headquarters in Europe and did not campaign. After
Fair Deal
The name President Harry Truman gave to his policies to continue and extend many of the New Deal's domestic policies.
Chapter 24 The World the War
24 J
that primary, the momentum was hard to stop and Eisenhower was nominated by the Republicans in the summer of 1952—a bitter loss for Taft and his supporters.
Eisenhower asked California Senator Richard M. Nixon to be his running mate. Although the two were not close, and never were, Nixon brought balance to the ticket. Ike almost dumped Nixon at one point in the campaign because of charges that Nixon had a private, campaign fund donated by wealthy Californians. Nixon gave what became known as his “Checkers” television speech for its maudlin promise to keep the family dog, named Checkers, even though the dog had been a gift. The speech was a success, and Nixon stayed on the ticket. For the rest of his career, even after his own presidency, Nixon celebrated the day of the speech. At the age of 38, Nixon was considered young while Ike at 62 was considered old. Nixon had made his name with his search for Communists when he was a member of the House Un-American Activities Committee. In addition, he was from the West Coast while Ike’s strongest support was in the East.
The Democrats nominated Illinois Governor Adlai Stevenson. Like Eisenhower, Stevenson was a strong Cold Warrior and a known internationalist who had been one of the founders of the United Nations. He had a reputation as an honest politician in a state where Democrats were often corrupt. He was more conservative than Truman on most domestic issues, especially race, and he selected Alabama Senator John Sparkman as his running mate, in part to ensure that there would be no Dixiecrat walkout in 1952. Stevenson was also very popular with many liberals, mostly because of his intelligence and wit. One said that his speeches were “simply gems of wisdom and wit and sense.” Unfortunately for Stevenson’s vote-getting, this skill mattered more to the party’s intellectual leaders than to many in the working class-black-urban coalition that had been key to the election of Roosevelt and Truman.
The campaign was the first in which television played a major role. The Republicans made effective use of short TV spots that carried brief comments by Ike along with his famous smile. Ike also promised a nation that was desperately tired of the war, “I shall go to Korea,” though it was unclear what he would do there. In November, Ike won 55 percent of the vote and carried the electoral college 442 to 89, winning even Florida, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia, states that had voted Democrat for decades. The Republicans won small majorities in Congress.
Eisenhower fulfilled his campaign promise and went to Korea. Early in his term, he was able to conclude the peace treaty that had eluded Truman. Korea remained divided, but the conflict ended. Ike intended to create what he called “Modern Republicanism.” He was a determined internationalist who kept the United States active in the UN and NATO. Under Ike, there would be no return to 1920s-style isolationism. He was determined to balance the federal budget and not likely to launch major new programs, but not roll back the major New Deal initiatives either. He once said, “Should any political party attempt to abolish social security, unemployment insurance, and eliminate labor laws and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history.” He dismissed the conservative wing of the Republican Party, saying of the conservative California Senator William Knowland, “In his case, there seems to be no final answer to the question, ‘How stupid can you get?”’
With Eisenhower s election, a new Republican administration was prepared to maintain many of the New Deal’s domestic policies and Truman’s Cold War internationalism. Individuals changed, but surprisingly little policy changed after the inauguration. Nevertheless, as the Great Depression and World War II receded and a new generation grew up with no memory of that difficult past, and as many Americans experienced unprecedented prosperity, the culture began to change. The 1950s were staid to some, surprisingly novel to others, and full of surprises for most.
243
Quick Review Aside from their political parties, how different were Truman and Eisenhower as candidates and as presidents?
712 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits 1945-1980
CONCLUSION
The experience of World War II had a profound effect on American culture in the decade that followed the war. The federal government offered generous benefits to returning veterans, allowing a whole generation of young men to attend college, to buy homes, and to live comfortable middle class lives. Men and women, anxious to leave the war behind, married quickly and had children, a lot of children. The population soared in what was called a baby boom.
In the postwar era, the living patterns of Americans changed drastically. Many middle class white Americans left the cities for homes in newly created suburban communities. At the same time, the rate of migration of southern blacks to the urban centers of the North exploded. Many black migrants moved into city centers because they were excluded from suburban developments. Latinos from Puerto Rico and Mexico moved to American cities, notably New York and Los Angeles.
The economic gains achieved during the war continued throughout the postwar period, made possible, in part, by the position of the United States as the only remaining economic superpower in the world. Consumers, who had more money than ever, purchased goods produced by American manufacturers, achieved new levels of economic security and affluence, buying automobiles, televisions, and electric appliances in the postwar economy.
The end of the World War II also brought on new attempts at international cooperation. In an effort to create political and economic stability and a lasting peace, the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank, were ushered into being.
While enjoying the remarkable prosperity of the postwar era, more and more Americans became deeply concerned about the Soviet Union and the spread of communism. The containment of communism became the bedrock of U.S. foreign policy in the Truman administration. By 1952, both the United States and the Soviet Union possessed hydrogen bombs, and the possibility of “mutually assured destruction” set off a Cold War between the two countries that would last 40 years. In Europe, the Cold War was institutionalized in the western-led North Atlantic Treaty Organization founded by the United States and Great Britain and the eastern Warsaw Pact led by the Soviet Union. America’s uneasy relationship with the Soviet Union resulted in a second Red Scare within the United States itself. Fueled by the fiery rhetoric of Senator Joseph McCarthy and others, Americans began to suspect communist infiltration everywhere, and many personal and professional lives were ruined by accusations of treason, espionage, and Communist Party membership that often had little basis in reality.
In 1950, the American policy of containment was tested when North Korea attacked South Korea. The United States, with support from the United Nations, took up the defense of South Korea even after a huge army from Communist China attacked U.S. forces in the region. After fierce fighting, the outcome of the war was ambiguous. The United States and China signed an armistice that left Korea divided much as it had been since the end of World War II. With the election of a new president, Dwight Eisenhower, in November 1952, the nation that was tired of the war in Korea settled into what many hoped would be a new era of peace and prosperity even as they continued to fear the Soviet Union and the mushroom cloud of atomic destruction.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
How did the actions of the United States after World War II reflect its new posi-
tion as a world superpower?
Chapter 24 The World the War Crea
Chapter 24 Chapter Review
24.1
THE UNITED STATES IN
1945_______________________________ Describe the new technology, living patterns, and political arrangements in the United States that resulted from World Warll.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
How did advances in science and technology change everyday life for Americans in the 1950s?
2.	Cause and Effect
What explains the rapid growth of suburbs in the 1950s?
3.	Constructing an Argument
Why did the rate of African-American migration to the North explode after World War II?
4.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the migration of African-Americans and Latinos in the 1950s. What similarities and differences do you note?
6.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the anticommunist hysteria relating to World War I with the hysteria that followed World War II. What similarities and differences do you note?
7.	Historical interpretation
Why was the Korean War a turning point in the Cold War?
POLITICS, 1948 AND 1952
243
Explain political developments that led to the elections of Truman and then Eisenhower as Cold War era presidents.
Review Questions
8.	Cause and Effect
How did Truman’s policy initiatives during his first term impact the election of 1948?
9.	Historical Interpretation
Why was Eisenhower’s election a turning point in American politics?
THE COLD WAR BEGINS
24.2
Analyze the coming of the Cold War, tensions with the Soviet Union, and McCarthyism at home.
Review Questions
5.	Cause and Effect
Why did relations between the United States and the Soviet Union deteriorate so rapidly after World War II?
714 PartVIll Fears,Joys, and Limits 1945-1980

25
Complacency and C
1952-1965
Only the arrival of federal troops assured the integration of Little Rock High School in 1957.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Dwight Eisenhower was the U.S. Supreme Commander in Europe when Harry Truman became president in the spring of 1945. In that role, he worked for Truman as he had for Roosevelt. But when Eisenhower decided to enter the Republican race for the White House and attacked Truman and the Democrats during the campaign, the relationship between the two men was deeply strained. Between Eisenhower’s election victory in November 1952 and inauguration in 1953, the outgoing Truman administration had little to do with the new one. Nevertheless, once in office, Eisenhower made surprisingly few changes to Truman’s policies. The Republican Eisenhower ended the war in Korea, mostly with a veiled threat to use atomic weapons, and surprisingly, solidified core New Deal policies and the Cold War.
Eisenhower’s was a reassuring presence, and many considered his
8 years in office to be a time of complacency and stability in national life. However, the era was also one of extraordinary change. New technology, most of all television, changed the culture. Dissent from the dominant complacency was found in many places, most of all among the young and the more than 10 percent of Americans who were of African origin. The modern Civil Rights Movement began in the 1950s. The perceived stability and the many real changes of the 1950s are the focus of this chapter.
Demonstrate an understanding of how different aspects of the 1950s, from the seeming complacency of Eisenhower's time to the growing Civil Rights Movement reshaped the United States.
EISENHOWER'S AMERICA, AMERICA'S WORLD
Explain the continuation of the Cold War under a new Republican administration.
A CULTURE ON THE MOVE
Explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS
Analyze the growth and impact of the Civil Rights Movement between 1954 and 1965.
25.1
25.2
25.3
Chapter 25 Complacency and Cl

I 1952 Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for president i	United States tests H-Bomb
\	1953 Soviet Union tests H-Bomb
’ "	Eisenhower proposes "Atoms for Peace" at UN
U.S.
Supreme Court m. Board of Education ruling Defeat of French forces at Dien Bien Phu, Vietnam
U.S.-supported coup overthrows government in Guatemala
Senate censures Joseph McCarthy
1955	Eisenhower-Khrushchev summit meeting in Geneva
Rosa Parks arrested in Montgomery, Alabama
1956	Elvis Presley "Heartbreak Hotel" released Khrushchev "Secret Speech" denouncing Stalin Eisenhower signs Interstate Highway Act Suez Canal crisis
Hungarian uprising
Eisenhower defeats Stevenson for a second time
Conclusion of Montgomery bus boycott
1957	Riots at Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas
Soviet Union launches Sputnik satellite
1959	Castro comes to power in Cuba
U.S. U-2
reconnaissance plane shot down over Soviet Union Kennedy defeats Nixon for president
1961	John F. Kennedy inaugurated as president
Newton Minow speech, "Television and the Public Interest"
1963	March on Washington for civil rights
1964	Civil Rights Act passed
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party challenges regular Mississippi delegation at Democratic Convention
Malcolm X makes pilgrimage to Mecca
1965	Malcolm X assassinated
25.1
massive retaliation
A policy adopted by the Eisenhower administration to limit the costs of the Cold War. Rather than keep a large military presence, the administration used the threat to use the hydrogen bomb if the Soviet Union expanded its grasp to new territory.
EISENHOWER’S AMERICA, AMERICA’S WORLD___________________________________
Explain the continuation of the Cold War under a new Republican administration.
The successful test of a U.S. hydrogen bomb in November 1952, followed only months later by the successful test of a similar bomb by the Soviet Union (United Soviet Socialist Republic, or U.S.S.R.) in August 1953, meant that Eisenhower and every subsequent president would govern in a world that was quite different from any of their predecessors. While alliances like the U.S.-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact might position ground forces, the reality was that each of the superpowers had the capacity to destroy the other in a single stroke, and probably, for the first time in history, to destroy all life on earth. The Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union was a daunting reality for every person on the planet in the 1950s and for a long time thereafter.
Foreign Policy in a World of Hydrogen Bombs
Early in his first term, Eisenhower lamented, “We are in an armaments race. Where will it lead us? At worst, to atomic warfare. At best to robbing every people and nation on earth of the fruits of their own toil.” Eisenhower tried to diffuse the situation. In December 1953, he proposed an “Atoms for Peace” plan to the United Nations by which the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom, would turn over some of their nuclear material to an international agency for peaceful use. However, little came of the plan. The distrust between the two superpowers was too great. Influential political leaders in the United States would not support a reduction in defense spending because they worried about the Soviets and because military spending—a total of more than $350 billion during Eisenhower’s two terms—was key to defense industries and jobs in almost every congressional district in the country. So, the United States and the Soviets continued to build. The United States tested 203 nuclear weapons in the Pacific and at Nevada test sites, exposing some 200,000 civilians and soldiers to radiation and even more people to the radioactive fallout in more distant areas. The Soviets conducted at least as many tests if not more.
Along with his Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, Eisenhower tried to craft a foreign policy that kept the financial costs of the Cold War to a minimum, protected U.S. influences in key corners of the globe, and avoided war. This foreign policy comprised two key elements. The first was a policy of massive retaliation, announced by Dulles in January 1954. The United States was not prepared to take on the cost of keeping troops in every corner of the globe, especially after the war in Korea. Rather, the United States would try to protect the noncommunist world with programs like the Marshall Plan and the Berlin Airlift where possible, but also with the promise that if the Soviets tried to expand their sphere of influence, if they were to invade European or other countries allied with the West, then, said Dulles, the United States was prepared “to retaliate, instantly, by means and at a place of our choosing.” Some called the policy “brinkmanship” since the United States was ready to go to the brink of destruction if the Soviets moved outside their sphere of influence, and the Soviets were being put on notice that the United States was prepared to use its H-bombs and use them quickly. The Soviets might have had a larger army and navy, but the United States had plenty of bombs, Polaris submarines, as well as Atlas and Minuteman rockets that could hit the Soviet Union any time and any place. From a force of 1,500 nuclear weapons, the U.S. stockpile increased to 6,000. Relying on those weapons, the country could reduce the size of the military and overall military expenditures, keep taxes relatively low, and avoid inflation yet still ensure U.S. power around the globe.
716 PartVIll Fears,Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
The second element in Eisenhower’s foreign policy depended on secret activities organized by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). During World War II, the United States developed the capacity to spy on and disrupt the Axis countries through the Office of Strategic Services. At the end of the war, President Truman disbanded that office. Two years later, he received congressional authorization to re-create it, now as the CIA, to spy and conduct covert operations in foreign countries that the United States feared might become communist.
In the summer of 1953, the CIA organized a coup against the elected Prime Minister of Iran, Muhammad Mussadegh, who had nationalized oil interests belonging to British companies and who some feared might have communist sympathies. With the covert help of the CIA, he was overthrown and replaced with the pro-Western Muhammad Reza Shah Pahlevi, who ruled the country for more than 20 years before being displaced by an anti-U.S. Islamic revolution in the late 1970s.
Then in June 1954, the CIA helped overthrow the democratically elected government of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in Guatemala. Arbenz was promoting land reform by expropriating land owned by the U.S.-based United Fruit Company. Although the Arbenz administration had compensated United Fruit for the land, the company was angry, and the U.S. government feared a communist movement until CIA operatives, working with local insurgents, drove Arbenz from office. Neither action received much publicity in the United States, but the not-very-secret U.S. involvement built up significant anti-U.S. sentiment in the Middle East and Latin America. Later, in 1958, the CIA tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the government of Indonesia. In 1959, it played a role in installing a new pro-Western government in Laos. While Eisenhower knew of those actions, he may not have known about plans to assassinate the popular elected leader of the Congo, Patrice Lumumba (who was killed by dissidents before the CIA reached him), and the new leader of Cuba, Fidel Castro.
The Eisenhower administration also found itself caught up in other world crises that could not easily be handled by massive retaliation or CIA intervention. After World War II, France sought to reclaim control of its former colonies in Indochina, but many there wanted independence. In September 1945, with initial support from the United States, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed Vietnamese independence using words familiar to the Americans, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.” But the French were determined to reclaim Vietnam. They installed Bao Dai, the former emperor of Annam, a part of Vietnam, as the leader in Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh’s forces attacked the French. The United States, fearing a communist government under Ho and more worried about alienating France in Cold War Europe than events in Asia, sided with the French. By late 1953, the French were isolated in a fortified area, Dien Bien Phu, and facing defeat. Some, including Vice President Nixon, urged U.S. intervention, even the use of nuclear weapons. Eisenhower responded, “You boys must be crazy. We can t use those awful things against Asians for the second time in less than ten years. My God. There was no U.S. intervention at that time.
When the French were defeated in 1954, an international conference temporarily divided Vietnam into North Vietnam, to be led by Ho Chi Minh, and South Vietnam, to be led by Bao Dai and a pro-Western nationalist Ngo Dinh Diem. Elections to unify the country were scheduled for 1956. When Diem refused to participate in the 1956 elections, knowing that Ho, a national hero would win, the United States did not intervene The United States relied on the South East Asian Treaty Organization (SEATO), a much weaker version of NATO that it had helped to create in 1955, to keep Communists out of Southeast Asia, but the organization had little effect.
The next crisis also occurred in Asia. Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist government had been defeated on the Chinese mainland in 1949 and was ensconced on heavily fortified offshore islands, the largest of which was Taiwan, then known as Formosa, n 1954, the Communist government of China began shelling two tiny Nationalist-held
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
Established by President Truman and expanded by President Eisenhower, the CIA was the nation's spy agency charged with keeping tabs on developments in other countries and with engaging in secret missions to advance American interests.
Chapter 25 Complacency and Chang<
25.1
PACIFIC
OCEAN

ARCTIC
Military alliances in the 1950s HUM U.S. allies HI U.S. allies/NATO members CZ3 USSR allies
USSR allies/
____Warsaw Pact members
L...I
Neutral nation MAP 25-1 A World Divided. As the Cold War continued in the 1950s, the world was divided into two major spheres of influence: the West led by the United States, which included the members of NATO and other allies, and the East (see page 719) led by the Soviet Union, which included the members of the Warsaw Pact and other allied nations. Both competed for influence in the remaining neutral nations, especially in Africa.
islands, Quemoy and Matsu, just off the Chinese coast. Eisenhower wanted to protect Chiang s government, but Quemoy and Matsu were small islands that were much closer to mainland China than to Taiwan. Having seen the war in Korea, Eisenhower was determined not to fight Communist China over Quemoy and Matsu. Eventually, both sides tired of the conflict and the islands remained under Nationalist rule. Nevertheless, the incident pointed to larger possible threats.
718 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
25.1
i
p52
253
Challenges to Maintaining Peace
In July 1955, Eisenhower met in Geneva with the new Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, and leaders of Britain and France. The summit meeting, whose purpose was to reduce international tensions, produced a treaty recognizing the independence of Austria, which had been jointly occupied by the four powers after World War II, much like Germany had been. Although, the summit did not accomplish all that Eisenhower wished, many were optimistic about a new spirit of coexistence.
In February 1956, Khrushchev surprised the world with a speech—originally a “secret speech” to Soviet leaders only, but word spread quickly—in which he said that Stalin had been a tyrant who had inflicted purges, show trials, forced labor, terror, and mass executions on his people. Khrushchev declared it was time to begin the de-Stalinization of the Soviet Union. The speech was a relief to those who saw the beginning of a new era in Russia, though devastating to die-hard Communists.
Chapter 25 Complacency and Ch<
25.1
2,5.2 j
I
133 !
i
Despite these advances, conflicts and differences continued to produce tensions, to which U.S. leaders were challenged to respond. In October, hostilities flared up in the Middle East. Gamal Abdel Nasser, the Arab nationalist ruler of Egypt, sought funding from both the United States and the Soviet Union to build the Aswan High Dam on the upper Nile River to irrigate new areas of Egypt, provide electricity, and promote industrialization. His flirtation with both sides angered both countries, and in 1956, Dulles cancelled the U.S. loan. Nasser responded by taking control of the Suez Canal, the essential waterway between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea that was owned by a British and French canal company and crucial to the flow of oil to Europe. Nasser said he wanted the revenue from the canal to build his dam, but his actions angered and frightened the British and French.
On October 29, with British and French backing, Israel attacked Egypt. Eisenhower was outraged. He sponsored a UN resolution demanding an Israeli withdrawal. It was an ironic moment with the United States and the Soviet Union united in opposition to Britain, France, and Israel. When the British and French ignored the UN and bombed Egypt, Nasser sank ships and blocked the canal. The United States condemned the British action and threatened to send troops to Egypt. The British never expected the United States to take a hard line. British Prime Minister Anthony Eden and Ike were wartime friends, but the president was furious. A cease fire was arranged, and the canal was reopened under Egyptian management. The Soviet Union and the United States looked good to Arab countries. Israel remained strong. Only Britain and France suffered. Eden resigned as Prime Minister, and neither Britain nor France was again a major influence in the Middle East.
In October 1956, in the midst of the Suez crisis, discontent with Soviet rule boiled over in Hungary. Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin had raised hopes for a more liberal policy in Eastern Europe. The Soviet government granted some concessions to the Hungarians, but when they pressed for more independence, Khrushchev sent 200,000 troops and 4,000 tanks to Budapest to end the uprising. Some 40,000 Hungarians were killed and another 150,000 fled the country seeking asylum in the west. Some called for American intervention; after all, Eisenhower had talked about the liberation of “captive peoples,” but the old general understood the military reality that Hungary was surrounded by other Communist nations. Most Americans seemed satisfied to label the uprising as more proof of Soviet tyranny and leave it at that.
While the Suez crisis and the Hungarian uprising were taking place, the United States was in the midst of a presidential election. The Democrats again nominated Adlai Stevenson. Although Eisenhower had a serious heart attack in 1955 and was hospitalized for 6 weeks, he had recovered fully. The Republicans again nominated their highly popular president and his not-very-popular running mate. The Democrats ran anti-Nixon television ads that they thought might be more effective than any attack on Eisenhower. Eisenhower was well liked, the country was at peace, and prosperity was evident. Eisenhower won 57 percent of the popular votes, but the outcome rested on Eisenhower’s personal popularity; the Democrats carried both houses of Congress.
Neither the country nor the president expected any major change of course in the next 4 years. However, new developments on the international front presented not only new crises but also an opportunity unimagined when Ike’s second term began.
A
Small Satellite and a Big Impact Sputnik	On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, a space satellite. Although
The world's first space satellite, launched by	Sputnik was small, about the size of a large beach ball, and weighed only 184 pounds,
the Soviet Union in 1957.	it was the first orbiting satellite ever launched into space. A month later, a much larger
Sputnik II was launched, which carried a dog, Laika, as well as scientific and medical instruments. While the Soviet Union celebrated, Americans panicked. The Soviets were clearly winning the space race, critics said. Democratic Senator Henry Jackson of Washington State talked of the “shame and danger” of the moment. G. Mennen
720 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
A new government agency created in 1958 in response to Sputnik and specifically charged with fostering American space efforts; eventually led to the first manned moon landing and the space shuttle.
National Defense Education Act (NDEA)
Federal aid to improve education, especially science and math education, approved by Congress in 1958.
Sputnik I, the first space satellite.
Chapter 25 Complacency and!
Williams, Michigans Democratic governor, wrote of Sputnik, “It’s a Commie sky. And Uncle Sams asleep.”
Because of U.S. spy flights over the Soviet Union, Eisenhower knew that although the Soviets might launch a satellite, the United States was far ahead in missile development. However, he could not say so without admitting to the spying, which he did not want to do. It was a difficult moment for an administration that worried as much about national security as they did about a race to space. Nevertheless, two important results came from Sputnik and the fears that the satellite induced—a new government space agency and improved education.
In 1958, the administration proposed the creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and before long, NASA scientists and engineers had launched the first U.S. satellite and soon closed the gap with the Soviet Union. Later NASA-led efforts resulted in human flight in space, a moon landing, a string of satellites that could be used for telecommunications (and spying), and a space shuttle that could bring cargo to replacement crews to orbiting space stations. For all of the fears of 1957 and 1958, the United States had far greater resources than the Soviets to devote to these efforts once the determination was made to do so.
The fears that resulted from the Soviet launch of Sputnik also had a major impact on American education. Many saw the Soviet advances in space as the result of superior Soviet education. Eisenhower proposed the National Defense Education Act (NDEA), which was passed by Congress in September 1958. After many failed efforts to get federal aid for the nation’s schools, funding was approved because of Sputnik. The NDEA provided funds to improve science education, provided scholarships, and created an education division within the National Science Foundation.
Although national worries had led to NDEA and the new curriculum materials that resulted, the 1950s had already been a time of considerable advances in education. In 1940, less than half (49%) of the nation’s 17-year-olds graduated from high school. By 1950, 57.4 percent of 17-year-olds completed high school; in 1960, 63.4 percent; and in 1970, 75.6 percent graduated. Before 1950, more girls than boys had finished high school but more males than females went to college. For a time after that, graduation and college attendance ratios began to even out, though imbalance would return later. Although white graduation rates remained far ahead of those for African-American and Latino students, many more students of color attended and graduated from high school in the 1950s than ever
before. Given the perceived national need, federal programs began to encourage more females to study in the sciences. At the college level, the GI Bill had generated a rapid increase in college attendance for military veterans, overwhelmingly white men, but as the decade went on, more students of all races and genders attended college. College faculty in the sciences benefitted from grants for military research, though some worried about the impact of these grants. Even before Sputnik was launched, a Time magazine article asked, “Is the military about to take over U.S. science lock, stock, and barrel, calling the tune for U.S. universities and signing up the best scientists for work fundamentally aimed at military results?”
In spite of “mutually assured destruction and the space race with the Soviets, Eisenhower, who had seen more of war than most Americans, desperately wanted to find a path to peace, not only to avoid the economic costs of war but also to create a lasting peace. Although the July 1955 summit conference at Geneva had been disappointing, the “Spirit of Geneva, and the commitment to coexistence was something on which Eisenhower wanted to build, especially in his last years in office. On October 31, 1958,
During the goodwill that emerged between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1958 and 1959, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev visited the United States and was a hit on tours such as this one of an Iowa farm.
the United States announced that it was suspending nuclear testing in the atmosphere. The Soviets also suspended their testing. By 1958, atmospheric nuclear testing was found to be a health risk to millions around the world as well as an unnecessary military provocation, and the cessation was important.
When a new crisis arose over Berlin in early 1959, Eisenhower and Khrushchev managed to avoid escalation. Each of the two leaders agreed to invite the other to visit his respective country in the next year. Khrushchev’s tour of the United States in September 1959 was a major success in spite of Khrushchev’s ill-timed boast that We will bury you.” The two leaders agreed to another summit in Paris in May 1960. Progress seemed to be in the air.
On May 1, 1960, the progress stopped. A U-2 reconnaissance plane—the type that had been providing the kind of information about Soviet military capability that Eisenhower had kept secret—was shot down by a Soviet rocket as it flew 1,300 miles inside Russia. Khrushchev announced that the Soviets not only had the wreckage of the U-2—and it was no weather plane—but also had captured the pilot, Francis Gary Powers, alive and had found both the poison needle with which he was supposed to kill himself rather than risk capture and a pistol with a silencer that he had been supplied. “Why the silencer?” Khrushchev asked, and then answered, “To blow men’s brains out! The men who supplied him with the silence gun pray in church and call us godless atheists!”
The U-2 incident dominated the Paris summit. Khrushchev insisted that Eisenhower condemn the U-2 flights and punish those responsible, which Eisenhower could not do, though he did agree to suspend the flights. Khrushchev withdrew the invitation for Eisenhower to visit the Soviet Union. There would be little talk of friendly coexistence in the next 2 years.
From Oldest to Youngest—The Transition to the Next President
While the administration dealt with the U-2 incident, the United States was in the midst of the 1960 presidential election. Eisenhower’s popularity was high, and if the Constitution had allowed it and he had wanted it, he could easily have won a third term. But the Constitution had been changed and Eisenhower at 70, the oldest serving president, had no interest in a third term.
The Republican Party nominated Vice President Richard Nixon as their presidential candidate. The Democratic race was contested between several candidates, including Senators Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas, Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota, Stuart Symington of Missouri, and John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts. Many remembered the defeat of Al Smith in 1928—the last time a major party had nominated a Catholic—and wondered if Kennedy, a Catholic, could be successful. Liberals also worried about Kennedy. Eleanor Roosevelt remembered how slow he had been to attack McCarthy and how little he had done for civil rights. She preferred Adlai Stevenson. But Kennedy had several important strengths. He had extraordinary personal charisma, charming most everyone he met. He also had virtually unlimited campaign funds because of the wealth of his father, Joseph P. Kennedy, and could far outspend his opponents. Under the leadership of his brother Robert Kennedy, he had a superb campaign team. He won the Democratic nomination on the first ballot, asked Lyndon Johnson to be his running mate, and entered the general election as a strong candidate.
Nixon, having been vice president for two terms, was the better known. For the first time in American politics, the two candidates held a series of television debates.
722 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Those who listened to the debates on radio thought Nixon had won due to the clarity of his argument. For the much larger television audience, however, Nixon seemed tired and haggard while Kennedy who arrived from California well rested and with a tan seemed at the height of new youthful vigor. In response to Kennedy’s charisma, Newsweek reported that there were “jumpers” who leapt to see him, “runners” who chased his car, and others who simply screamed themselves hoarse. People applauded politely for Nixon.
Although Eisenhower despised the Kennedys, whom he saw as rich, ambitious, and unprincipled, his lack of enthusiasm for his vice president was hard to hide. When a reporter asked Ike to name a major Nixon contribution to the administration, he replied, “If you give me a week, I might think of one.” Although he immediately recanted, the damage was done.
During the competitive campaign, Kennedy accused Eisenhower of allowing a “missile gap” to develop between the United States and the Soviet Union and promised that, if elected, the United States would expand its defenses and its missions in space. He also addressed his Catholicism in a well-received speech to Protestant clergy in Houston,
Texas. Late in the campaign, when Martin Luther King, Jr., was arrested in Georgia, Nixon tried to intervene quietly, but Kennedy made a very public call to King’s wife, Coretta, and Bobby Kennedy made a successful request for King’s release. Many blacks, key voters in some states, decided to vote Democratic that fall. On election day, with the high-
est turnout since World War II, Kennedy won by one of the smallest margins in history—49.7 percent to Nixon’s 49.6 percent though he won in the Electoral College 303 to 219.
On inauguration day, January 20, 1961, the youngest person ever elected president replaced the oldest serving president. The general who had commanded all allied troops in Europe in World War II was replaced by a man who had commanded a small P.T. (Patrol Torpedo) boat in the Pacific and who became a hero when his PT-109 was sunk. The new president made much of the leadership change, telling the nation, “Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans.”
In the first ever televised presidential debate, John Kennedy managed to project charm and confidence to the viewers.
0
Quick Review How did Eisenhower continue fighting the Cold War? How were his Cold War and domestic policies similar to or different from Truman's?
A CULTURE ON THE MOVE
252
Explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
During and after the 1950s, many looked on that era as one of complacency at home and trouble abroad. By I960, however, the United States was a very different place at home from what it had been in 1950. During the 1950s, the nation became much more prosperous. In 1960, the average family income of $5,620 was 30 percent higher than it had been in 1950, and 62 percent of homes were owner occupied—up from 55 percent in 1950 and 44 percent in 1940. After the end of the Korean War in 1953, the decade was one of relative peace for the United States despite conflicts elsewhere. But the decade of the 1950s was also, as the writer Morris Dickstein noted, “a fertile period, a seedbed of ideas that would burgeon and live in the more activist, less reflective climate that followed.”
Chapter 25 Complacency and Chan
The Growing Impact of Television
In 1948, Wayne Coy, a member of the Federal Communications Commission that regulated television and radio, said, “Make no mistake about it, television is here to stay. It is a new force unloosed in the land. I believe it is an irresistible force. From 104 commercial stations broadcasting to 5 million homes in 1950, television expanded to almost 600 stations received in 45,750,000 homes in 1960—almost 80 percent of all of U.S. homes.
Some of the early television programs were impressive. Playhouse 90, the Goodyear Television Playhouse, and the Kraft Television Theater brought serious drama to the television screen. Talented young actors, including Grace Kelly, Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, and Eva Marie Saint, were seen by wider audiences than ever before. The ABC Concert carried weekly concerts by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra around the country.
Television news, though generally limited to a 15-minute program, included the Camel News Caravan with John Cameron Swayze and the CBS Television News with Douglas Edwards and brought current events into living rooms. Beginning with Truman’s 1949 inauguration and Eisenhower’s 1952 campaign commercials, television changed politics; people felt a new intimacy with candidates and leaders. Edward R. Murrow’s See It Now programs brought investigative journalism to television, including coverage of Senator McCarthy’s hearings.
Lighter entertainment was very successful, too. Radio had been available to many since the 1930s, and some programs, like Jack Benny’s comedy routines, shifted from radio to television with little change. The long-running I Love Lucy show with Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz was the most popular show on television. Other comedies, especially The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet, Father Knows Best, and Leave It to Beaver, used humor to reaffirm the white, middle class, suburban lifestyle in which the wise, sometimes befuddled father supported the family while the passive (if sometimes conniving) mother stayed home to happily manage the house.
A middle-class, white family sitting at home and watching The Lone Ranger on television epitomized the 1950s for some.
724 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
American Voices
Newton N. Minow, Television and the Public Interest, 1961
25.2
s he began his presidency, John F. Kennedy appointed attorney and long-time Democratic Party activist Newton N. Minow to chair the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Although Minow had little background in the media, he and Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy had strong opinions about television. In May 1961, only a few months into his tenure at the FCC, Minow gave this controversial speech to the National Association of Broadcasters, declaring that television was "a vast wasteland." While many in the television industry strongly disagreed, many critics thought Minow was on target.
Your industry possesses the most powerful voice in America. It has an inescapable duty to make that voice ring with intelligence and with leadership. In a few years, this exciting industry has grown from a novelty to an instrument of overwhelming impact on the American people. It should be making ready for the kind of leadership that newspapers and magazines assumed years ago, to make our people aware of their world....
When television is good, nothing—not the theater, not the magazines or newspapers—nothing is better.
But when television is bad, nothing is worse. I invite each of you to sit down in front of your television set when your station goes on the air and stay there, for a day, without a book, without
a magazine, without a newspaper, without a profit and loss sheet or a rating book to distract you. Keep your eyes glued to that set until the station signs off. I can assure you that what you will observe is a vast wasteland.
You will see a procession of game shows, formula comedies about totally unbelievable families, blood and thunder, mayhem, violence, sadism, murder, western bad men, western good men, private eyes, gangsters, more violence, and cartoons. And endlessly, commercials—many screaming, cajoling, and offending. And most of all, boredom.
Source: Delivered May 9,1961, National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, DC; downloaded from www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/newtonminow.htm, May 11,2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
In Minow's view, what was the most important negative impact of poor television programming?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light does Minow's speech shed on the nature of the growing discontent with mainstream 1950s culture?
On The Ed Sullivan Show, the poker-faced Ed Sullivan introduced Elvis Presley (who Sullivan insisted be shown only from the waist up) and, later, The Beatles to American audiences. Daytime soap operas (their original sponsors were soap companies) moved from radio to television, and Guiding Light, Love of Life, and Search for Tomorrow provided a dash of scandal to daytime viewers. Families gathered to eat TV dinners (first marketed in 1954) on TV trays, rather than around a dining room table, to watch Gunsmoke, featuring a stronger and more silent Marshal Dillon than had been possible on radio, plus Maverick, and Have Gun—Will Travel, as well as detective stories, including Dragnet, 77 Sunset Strip, and Perry Mason. Children s cartoons took over Saturday mornings. Reruns of old movies were shown in the late evening.
While some of the first programs had a single sponsor—such as the Goodyear Television Playhouse, the Kraft Television Theater, and the Camel News Caravan, broadcasters quickly discovered that they could make higher profits with multiple advertisers, and 30-second commercials urged Americans (always seen as white and middle class) to “see the USA in your Chevrolet,” or “move up to Chrysler,” and handle their indigestion with “Speedy” Alka Seltzer.
Television was rocked by not only a series of scandals in the late 1950s but also significant criticism. The most popular quiz show, The $64,000 Question, turned out to be rigged. Charles Van Doren, a major winner on the show, had been given answers in advance. As commercial stations focused on advertising revenue, they became increasingly cautious. One advertiser reminded the station owners, “A program that displeases any substantial segment of the population is a misuse of the advertising dollar.” Since showing Americans in all of their diversity could displease some, television became bland. Even President Eisenhower said, “If a citizen has to be bored to death,
Chapter 25 Complacency and Change
I
Interstate Highway System
A national system of super highways that Congress approved at the urging of President Eisenhower in 1956 to improve car and truck travel across the United States.
it is cheaper and more comfortable to sit at home and look at television than it is to go outside and pay a dollar for a ticket.” It was hardly a ringing endorsement of the new medium. The Kennedy administration would not be any more positive in its appraisal.
The Impact of the Automobile
Automobiles had been invented before 1900, mass-produced in the 1910s, and had a significant impact by the 1920s (see Chapter 21). Nevertheless, the automobile, like the TV, came to dominate American culture in the 1950s as never before.
Once wartime shortages ended, the sales of private automobiles grew rapidly. By 1960, 80 percent of American families owned an automobile (the same percentage as owned televisions). The total number of cars registered at the end of the decade was 74 million, almost double the 39 million registered in 1950. In addition, the cars were becoming larger, faster, more powerful, and much flashier. In an era of cheap gasoline, the symbolism of power, sexiness, and speed was far more important than fuel efficiency.
Automobiles needed support services and infrastructure, most of all, highways. By the early 1950s, the American Road Builders Association was able to successfully lobby for the creation of the Highway Trust Fund in which all revenue generated from automobiles, especially the tax on gasoline, could be used only to build highways with the result that, in the United States, funding for road building was ample, though funds for mass transit were more scarce. European countries used similar funds not only for roads but also for mass-transit, schools, and hospitals.
President Eisenhower, who remembered a miserable cross-country journey he had made as a young army officer on the nations ill-maintained highways of the 1920s, adopted a plan that had been put together during the Truman administration and proposed the Interstate Highway Act, which became law in 1956. The act created the Interstate Highway System, a numbered network of 41,000 miles of roads from Interstate 5 in California, Oregon, and Washington to Interstate 95 that ran from Florida to Maine, connected to east-west interstates 70, 80, and 90 as well as feeder highways for which the federal government paid 90 percent of the cost (see Map 25-2). These highways made travel by car, truck, or bus much easier and cheaper than ever before. At the same time, urban, suburban, and rural sprawl was exacerbated. Suburban houses sprang up and tight-knit urban communities went into decline. Shopping malls replaced Main Street. Mass transit declined. In Los Angeles, what had once been the largest electric interurban railway in the world with 1,100 miles of track, was replaced with a system of highways using buses produced by General Motors with tires from Firestone Rubber.
New industries sprang up to service the automobile and the highway. Fast-food restaurants allowed busy drivers to pick up a meal and keep moving. Medical, legal, and insurance services for the victims of traffic accidents grew. Motels became a new place to stay, replacing grand downtown hotels that had catered to those who traveled by train or ship. Kemmons Wilson and Wallace E. Johnson opened the first “Holiday Inn” in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1952, and by 1960, there were 60,000 motels, many belonging to chains like Holiday Inn or Howard Johnson, catering to people who valued cleanliness, comfort, and the convenience of being able to drive directly to the door of a room.
Between 1920 and 1950, gasoline service stations offering fuel and automobile services, some in a grand style, became the most widely built new commercial structure in the United States. With their signs advertising Mobil, Shell, and Esso (later Exxon), they made it possible to keep cars fueled and on the move. The gasoline these stations pumped also had an impact on U.S. foreign policy as American political leaders understood the nation s love affair with the automobile and the need to maintain a steady supply of cheap gasoline, much of it from the Middle East and Latin American, if they were to stay in office.
726 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
.Seattle
MAP 25-2 The Interstate Highway System. The current Interstate Highway System is surprisingly close to the original plan approved by the federal government in 1956 for a system of super highways linking all parts of the 48 states.
Critics worried about the impact of the automobile on American culture. In The City in History, Lewis Mumford complained that the automobile “annihilates the city whenever it collides with it.” For Mumford, it was the city, not suburban sprawl, that created community. Raymond Tucker, mayor of St. Louis also noted, “The plain fact of the matter is that we just cannot build enough lanes of highways to move all of our people by private automobile and create enough parking space to store the cars without completely paving over our cities.” Nevertheless, in the 1950s, more Americans agreed with New York’s master highway builder Robert Moses, who designed a series of bridges in and around New York as well as the Brooklyn Queens Expressway, the Cross Bronx Expressway, and the Long Island Expressway, and who kept advocating for more roads even as some protested. The Boom of Religion
In the 1950s, Americans drove to church and watched religious programs on television in numbers never seen before. The religious boom of the 1950s was both a cultural and a spiritual phenomenon.
For most of the nation’s history, a little over one-third of the people were involved in religious activities. However, in the 1950s, that number grew to over two-thirds, and on some Sunday mornings, more than half of all of the people in the country were in church. After World War II, Americans became active in religious organizations in numbers
Chapter 25 Complacency
never seen before, and their participation kept rising for the next 15 years. Visitors from other countries were stunned by the American embrace of religion. In no other country was there a similar upsurge, certainly not in war-weary Europe. Americans identified with religious communities, built new churches at an astounding rate, especially in the new suburbs, and enjoyed songs like “I Believe,” “It’s No Secret What God Can Do, and “Vaya con Dios,” as popular secular music. Historians continue to ask what accounted for this upsurge in religious activity. The roots of something as elusive as religious faith and as hard to discover as social conformity may be impossible to find, but the signs of the times that pointed to a more religious culture were numerous.
No one represented the religious movements of the 1950s more dramatically than Billy Graham. Graham was born on a farm near Charlotte, North Carolina, in 1918. In 1949, he led a revival in Los Angeles that brought him national attention and remained the nation’s best known religious leader for the next 50 years. The Billy Graham Evangelistic Association had an annual budget of $2 million and a staff of 200 in the 1950s. It produced books, television programs, radio, and its own films. Most of all, the association organized massive religious revivals that were held in football stadiums and civic auditoriums around the country. To the frustration of some conservative supporters, Graham would not plan a religious crusade, as he called a revival, without the support of the local council of churches, which included liberal as well as conservative clergy. Graham also refused to hold racially segregated revivals, even in the Deep South.
Graham was immensely successful in bringing out thousands of people night after night. At the end of each event, individuals were invited to come forward and make a personal confession of faith to counselors who were waiting for them, as the audience sang, “Just as I Am Without One Plea.” Although he was a Baptist, Graham did not worry about religious denominations and urged the converted to attend any church that appealed to them. Graham’s success was such that he also became a religious advisor to several U.S. presidents.
While Graham was by far the best known and most successful revivalist of the 1950s, many others, black and white and increasingly Latino evangelists, conducted their own religious revivals in churches, tents, and fields across the United States. Oral Roberts, a Pentecostal Holiness revivalist and faith healer, built up his own media empire that rivaled Graham’s. Less emotional versions of religion, including the sermons of the Presbyterian minister Peter Marshall, published in 1949 as Mr. Jones Meet the Master also attracted a wide audience.
A
Protestant minister within the Reformed Church in America, Norman Vincent Peale, took the quest for peace of mind to a wide audience through his books, Guide to Confident Living published in 1948 and The Power of Positive Thinking published in 1952, which broke all previous records for the sales of a religious book. Peale’s message was “believe in yourself’ and develop “a humble but reasonable confidence.” Religious groups known as the “mainstream” of American Protestantism—Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, and Episcopalians—flourished in the 1950s with large memberships and with influence rivaling any point in their history. Reinhold Niebuhr s book, Moral Man and Immoral Society, challenged religious people to find ways to make ethical decisions in a complex world. Both Reinhold Niebuhr and the German-born theologian Paul Tillich appeared on the cover of Time magazine. In the 1950s, American Catholics were still a minority but were more numerous than any single Protestant denomination. As white Catholics moved to new suburban communities, Catholic bishops created new parishes where none had been. Some Catholic prelates such as New York s Francis Cardinal Spellman continued to keep their distance from Protestants, but others such as Boston s Richard Cardinal Cushing found ways to reach out to non-Catholics while building Catholic churches and parochial schools at a furious rate. The walls of distrust were still high in the 1950s: parish priests warned young people not to date a Protestant, and many Protestants still saw Catholicism as inherently foreign and undemocratic. Nevertheless, many of those who sat in the pews of Catholic and Protestant churches were ready to ignore the old divides.
728 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Monsignor Fulton J. Sheen became a popular preacher not only at Catholic religious gatherings (never called revivals) but also on television. He brought Catholic teachings into the mainstream of American culture, and his book Peace of Soul, published in 1949, anticipated some of the positive-thinking themes in Peale’s work. Sheen restated traditional Catholic beliefs in ways that appealed to a wide audience, Catholic and non-Catholic.
While 66 percent of Americans identified themselves as Protestant and 26 percent as Catholic, only 3 percent were Jews, but Jews also participated in the religious upsurge of the 1950s. Before World War II, secularism and assimilation seemed to go hand in hand among many Jewish immigrants. Although a growing awareness of the Holocaust brought despair and cynicism to some, it brought a renewed interest in their faith to others. A new generation of leaders like Rabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel spoke of the need to link modern thinking with traditional Jewish practices and inner piety. Many American Jews wanted to rediscover their faith. The children of parents who had argued over politics now argued over theology. Attendance at synagogues reached peaks never seen before. The Orthodox, Reform, and Conservative branches of Judaism all grew.
African-American communities also had their own revivals of religion, usually quite separately from white communities. The National Baptist Convention, the African Methodist Episcopal, and the African Methodist Episcopal Zion churches, the nation’s three largest African-American religious bodies, all grew during the 1950s. Black Pentecostalism flourished in northern cities as it long had in the rural South. The Church of God in Christ, founded in the 1890s, saw its largest growth in the 1950s and by 1965 had 420,000 members in 4,150 churches. The United House of Prayer for All People, led by “Sweet Daddy” Grace, promised grace in return for strict obedience to the church’s teaching. In addition, Elijah Muhammad built up the Nation of Islam from the small Detroit Temple Number One, founded in 1931, to perhaps a community of 100,000 members.
A much smaller number of Americans also looked beyond the bounds of the traditional western faiths. The inspiration of Mohandas Gandhi in India led some to look at Hinduism. From the teachings of the Vedanta Society or the California-based Self-Realization Fellowship, some people turned to yoga or transcendental meditation. Others were attracted to the Baha’i movement, an offshoot of Shiite Islam in Iran that sought to synthesize the teachings of all world religions. Buddhism remained small in the United States in the 1950s, mostly limited to communities of Asian immigrants, though in the 1960s that status would change quickly.
As Americans became more actively engaged in their religious communities, political leaders sought to catch up. In the midst of the Cold War, they saw American religious sentiment as an important counter to atheistic communism. In 1954, Congress voted to add the phrase “one nation under God” to the Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag. A year later, Congress added the words “In God We Trust” to American paper currency. While some believers and nonbelievers found this public religiosity offensive, most Americans embraced the sort of civic religion embedded in the new pledge and coins with enthusiasm. President Eisenhower said, Our government makes no sense unless it is founded on a deeply felt religious faith and I don t care what it is.
Dissent
Although the 1950s have been described as a time of conformity, not everyone conformed. Born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1897, Dorothy Day joined the Socialist Party and later the IWW as a young woman, opposed U.S. entry into World War I, and was arrested for picketing the White House as she demanded the vote for women. In the 1920s, she lived a bohemian life with poets and communists in New Yorks Greenwich Village. Then in 1927, she experienced a dramatic conversion to Catholicism, left the man with whom she was living, and was baptized along with her new baby. In the 1930s, along with the
Chapter 25 Complacency
729
Catholic mystic Peter Maurin, founded the Civil Catholic Worker Movement and its related newspaper, The Catholic Worker, which Day edited until her death in 1980. Day embraced voluntary poverty, set up the St. Josephs House of Hospitality in New York to provide food and clothing to those in need, and protested the buildup of nuclear arms and the wars in Korea and later Vietnam. The Catholic Worker Movement sometimes made church officials uncomfortable because it represented a voice of dissent within the Catholic Church and the larger American culture in the 1950s.
A
Protestant from the rural South, Myles Horton had much in common with Dorothy Day. Horton studied with Reinhold Niebuhr and later Jane Addams, joined the Socialist Party, picketed for the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, and participated in endless seminars and late night discussions. In 1931, he moved back to Tennessee where he opened the Highlander Folk School to work with people from the bottom, who could change society from the bottom.” In the 1930s and 1940s, Highlander trained grass-roots leadership for the labor movement, and in the 1950s and 1960s, for the Civil Rights Movement. These groundbreaking dissidents, however, seemed tame to many compared with the influence of rock n’ roll, and no rock ‘n’ roll figure got more attention, or worried more people in the 1950s, than Elvis Presley. Presley grew up poor in Mississippi and Tennessee, learning to sing and play a guitar in his Assembly of God congregation. Music producer Sam Phillips knew that although many young white Americans loved black music, even the best of black entertainers could not break through the culture’s rigid color barrier. “If I could find a white man with a Negro sound,” Phillips said, “I could make a billion dollars.” With Elvis, he came close.
With Phillips handling the marketing, Elvis Presley became a star. The music in “Hound Dog” and “Heartbreak Hotel” represented a new amalgam of rhythm and blues, jazz, and pop as well as the earlier rock £n’ roll of groups like Bill Haley and the Comets whose “Rock Around the Clock” sold 16 million records.
Elvis sold more than his music. His alienated look and his gyrating sexuality connected with young audiences who loved what he represented. Critics were appalled.
Elvis Presley's music and performance style captivated fans and frightened more cautious observers but transformed rock and roll music in American culture.
730 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
One said that his performances were “strip-teases with clothes on.. .not only suggestive but downright obscene. Exactly that sultry suggestiveness is just what made him so popular to a generation tired of conformity. When Elvis appeared on the Ed Sullivan Show, 54 million people watched, the largest television audience in history.
Elvis was the top musical star leading many other musicians such as black rock ‘n’ roll artists Chuck Berry, Chubby Checker, and Fats Domino as well as traditional pop music and jazz greats, but it was the new rock ‘n’ roll that defined the era. Leonard Bernstein, one of the great composers of the century, once described Elvis Presley as “the greatest cultural force in the 20th century.”
Even in science, more overt attention to human sexuality challenged traditional norms in the 1950s. Alfred Kinsey, the Indiana University researcher whose book, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, had produced an outcry in 1948, published Sexual Behavior in the Human Female in 1953, which though long and full of dry scientific data, sold 250,000 copies. While Kinsey insisted that he was simply reporting, not making value judgments, findings like the fact that 37 percent of all men and 13 percent of women had at least one homosexual experience or the fact that 50 percent of married men and 26 percent of married women had committed adultery, shocked Americans and simultaneously created an “everybody’s doing it” mentality.
Hugh Hefner played into that mentality when he first published Playboy magazine in December 1953, which represented pure hedonistic pleasure. ..for men. Playboy linked sexuality with upward mobility and defined the good life as enjoying sex, liquor, smoking, and consumer products, without restraint. When Hefner published the first issue, with Marilyn Monroe as the centerfold, he was deeply in debt but sold enough copies that he could issue another, and by 1960, Playboy sold over a million copies a month.
Novelists joined in the celebration of sexuality. Grace Metalious, who had never written a book before, published Peyton Place in 1956, a novel that detailed scandalous affairs in a suburban context. Vladimir Nabokov, a respected writer, published Lolita, about the life of a young sex-addicted woman and a sex-obsessed middle-aged man. In 1958, Grove Press published an unexpurgated edition of D. H. Lawrence’s Lady Chatterley’s Lover, unavailable previously in the United States. Whatever else Americans were doing in the privacy of their homes, larger numbers of them were clearly reading much more sexually explicit material in the 1950s than in any previous generation.
Within this context of breaking from traditional cultural norms, other artists explored their own alienation in a conformist society. In J.D. Salinger’s novel, The Catcher in the Rye, the book’s teenage hero, Holden Caulfield saw adults as “phonies” who kept up pretenses that did not fit reality. Novelists like Ralph Ellison, Flannery O’Connor, Saul Bellow, Bernard Malamud, James Baldwin, John Updike, Mary McCarthy, and Philip Roth explored America’s racism and the quiet desperation of many. In the late 1950s, poets and political radicals like Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac took dissent to new levels. The “beat generation” challenged not only cultural pretentions of Eisenhower’s America, but the artistic pretentions of its major critics. In “Howl,” Ginsberg’s 1956 poem, he wrote, “I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness.” It was Ginsberg’s good luck that police in San Francisco seized Howl and Other Poems as obscene and forced a trial that brought Ginsberg to national attention. Kerouac’s On the Road, published in 1957, glorified escape from expectations and conventions. Some in the 1950s found themselves embracing Kerouac s belief that, “Ihe only people for me are the mad ones, the ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same time, the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing, but burn, burn, burn like fabulous yellow roman candles exploding like spiders across the stars.
A
Quick Review How did the media play a strong role in both the conformity and rebellion of the 1950s? What other forces supported conformity or rebellion? Chapter 25 Compla
lange 731
RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS
25.3
Analyze the growth and impact of the Civil Rights Movement between 1954 and 1965.
1
75 j!
25.3
Segregation, economic marginalization, and political disenfranchisement were reality for most African-Americans in the 1950s as they had been since the collapse of Reconstruction in the 1870s and 1880s (see Chapter 15 and Chapter 19). However, the African-American community never accepted segregation or second-class citizenship, and in the 1950s, it seemed as if African-American resistance to “separate but equal” burst forth in many different places at about the same time (see Map 25-3). Legal challenges to school segregation that had been building for decades achieved a major victory in 1954. Soon thereafter, long-simmering opposition to segregation in public transportation led to a year-long bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama. Meanwhile, young African-Americans and some white supporters sat in at segregated lunch counters, organized voter registration drives, and found themselves considering significant alternatives to American culture.
Brown v. Board of Education
A
Supreme Court decision in 1954 declaring that "separate but equal" schools for children of different races violated the Constitution. The Long Road to Brown v. Board of Education
On May 17, 1954, the United States Supreme Court announced its unanimous decision in the legal challenge to the racial segregation of public schools, a case known as Brown v. Board of Education. Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote:
We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of “separate but equal” has no place. Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.
It had been a long road to the day of that finding.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), though founded in 1909, was often only whispered in black communities in the South throughout the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s. In the early 1950s, Anne Moody, then a high school student in Centerville, Mississippi, asked her homeroom teacher what NAACP meant. The teacher said, “You see the NAACP is trying to do a lot for the Negroes and get the right to vote for Negroes in the South.” She also warned Moody, “I shouldn’t be telling you all of this... .It could cost me my job.” The teacher was gone the following year.
In the 1930s, the NAACP began to challenge state “separate but equal” laws, bypassing state legislatures and governors with federal court cases arguing that the separate facilities were, in fact, far from equal. Two brilliant lawyers took charge of the NAACP legal effort—Charles Hamilton Houston, then dean of the Howard University Law School, and his former student, Thurgood Marshall. When Houston retired in 1938, Marshall, then just 30 years old, became the NAACP chief counsel, a position he held for 23 years. In 1961, Marshall was appointed as a federal judge serving on the U.S. Court of Appeals, and from 1967 to 1991, he served as the first appointed African-American justice of the U. S. Supreme Court.
The Houston-Marshall strategy at the NAACP was to chip away at segregation. In a 1938 case, Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada, Registrar of the University, et al., the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Lloyd Gaines could not be rejected by the University of Missouri Law School on the basis of his race unless the university could offer him an equally good legal education within the state of Missouri. To offer legal education to whites but not to blacks, or to force blacks to leave the state for their education, Chief Justice Hughes said, “is a denial of the equality of legal right.” In Alston v. School Board of the City of Norfolk in 1940, the NAACP won a ruling that said separate salary schedules for black and white teachers violated the Fourteenth Amendment. In 1950, the court issued two rulings. In Sweatt v. Painter, it said that separate law schools for blacks and whites were not equal, and in McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents, it ruled that segregating graduate students violated their equal protection rights. With each case, segregation was becoming more expensive for states to maintain and the arena
732 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
In Brown v. ihe Topeka Board of” Education, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1954 that public school segregation was unconstitutional
Topeka
KANSAS
President Eisenhower ordered troops to enforce the intergration of Central High School in 1957
OKLAHOMA
Routes of 1961 Freedom Rides
CORE (Congress on Racial Equality) route from Washington, D.C., to Birmingham, Alabama SNCC (Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee) route from Birmingham, Alabama, to Jackson, Mississippi
MAP 25-3 Civil Rights Events, 1953-1963. Most of the major events of the Civil Rights Movement took place in the states of the South. Some are indicated in this map.

NEBRASKA
In 1962, James Meredith integrated j the University of Mississippi
TEXAS
| In 1955, the murder of I Emmett Till (age 14) by I whites drew national attention
in which it could be exercised smaller. The time was coming for a direct challenge to Plessy v. Ferguson, the 1896 decision by which the Supreme Court had originally approved “separate but equal” arrangements.
While the NAACP lawyers were winning cases, students at the all-black R. R. Morton High School in Farmville, Virginia, called a strike to protest conditions at their school in 1951. Although the white school in Farmville had comfortable facilities, some classes at R.R. Morton were held in tar-paper shacks, students had to wear coats to keep warm, and the teachers had to gather wood for the wood stoves. The authorities had long promised new facilities, but construction was continually postponed.
Only after going on strike did the students appeal to the NAACP. The national organization sent word that they would consider taking the case, but only if the challenge was for completely integrated schools. The students agreed and called on the adults in their community to follow them. Thus was launched one of the five cases that would be consolidated as Brown v. Board of Education.
The five states whose policies were challenged in the NAACP suit hired the 1924 Democratic presidential nominee John W. Davis as their attorney to defend the separate but equal policies. However, the Supreme Court agreed with the NAACP’s argument that separate education always violated the 14th amendment’s guarantee of “the equal protection of the laws.” The unanimous 1954 decision said, “We come then to the question presented: Does segregation of children in public schools solely on the basis of race, even though the physical facilities and other Tangible’ factors may be equal, deprive the children of the minority group of the equal educational opportunities? We believe that it does.
There were those who thought that with the Brown decision the battle was over. Many years later, Kenneth Clark, whose testimony was central to the case, recalled ruefully, “How naive I was!...I thought that within ten years or so, America would be free of it.... I expected southern states to resist, but I thought that their resistance would decrease and that we were on the road to some sort of functional democracy. It would take much more.
Chapter 25 Complacency and Ch.
Some governors began massive resistance to school integration. The most dramatic took place in Little Rock, Arkansas, in the fall of 1957. Rather than allow the racial integration of previously all-white Central High School, the state s segregationist governor Orval Faubus ordered the Arkansas National Guard to stop nine African-American students from enrolling in the school. In a speech the night before school was scheduled to begin, Faubus said he was making the move because of a fear of violence. Blood will run in the streets,” he said, if black students tried to enter Central High.
Nine brave young students, known as the Little Rock Nine, were scheduled to test the integration of Central High School. Elizabeth Eckford remembered the terror when she found herself face to face with a white mob:
Somebody started yelling, “Lynch her! Lynch her!”
I tried to see a friendly face somewhere in the mob—someone who maybe
would help. I looked into the face of an old woman and it seemed a kind face, but when I looked at her again, she spat on me.
It was a harrowing experience that Eckford never forgot.
The students, the mob, and the National Guard were all recorded on national television. While President Eisenhower was no advocate of school integration, he was not about to allow an order of the U.S. Supreme Court to be flouted. He told his Attorney General Herbert Brownell, “Well, if we have to do this, and I don’t see any alternative, then let’s apply the best military principles to it and see that the force we send there is strong enough that it will not be challenged, and will not result in any clash.” Eisenhower sent riot-trained units of the 101st Airborne. Before nightfall, a thousand U.S. soldiers were in Little Rock, securing the high school and ensuring the safety of the students.
Montgomery, Alabama
In 1955, a year and a half after the Brown decision, Rosa Parks finished her work day in Montgomery, Alabama, and began her bus ride home. She took a seat in the prescribed “Negro section” in the back of the bus. A few blocks later, when more whites boarded,
°"h T b aC\StU?entS wh0 sou9ht to enroll at Little Rock Central High School in September 1957, endures the taunts of an angry white crowd as she tries to make her way to the school.
734 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
!5/I
The arrest of Rosa Parks in 1955 for refusing to abide by the rules of the segregated buses of Montgomery, Alabama, represented an important moment in civil rights history, one of many developments that undermined the image of the 1950s as an era of total complacency with the status quo.
the driver, J. P. Blake, moved the line between the sections so that all of the whites could have seats. When none of the blacks moved,
Blake warned them, “You better make it light on yourselves and let me have those seats .” When others moved, Rosa Parks stayed where she was. “Are you going to stand up?” Blake asked. Parks said, quite simply, “No.”
Blake summoned the Montgomery police who arrested Parks.
When she was allowed to call home, Parks told her mother of her arrest and her mother immediately got in touch with E. D. Nixon, the acknowledged leader of Montgomery’s civil rights community who was not a newcomer to making tough decisions. Nixon, then 56, was president of Montgomery’s chapter of the NAACP. He worked as a porter on the railroad and was vice-president of the Alabama branch of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the most powerful black-led union in the United States. He had been one of the planners for the 1941 March on Washington. Nixon asked Clifford and Virginia Durr, Montgomery whites who were civil rights activists, to join him and the three went to the Montgomery jail to sign the bond for Rosa Parks’ release. Within a few hours, Parks was free and at home.
Early in that evening, the matter could have ended. The court would probably have let Parks off with a small fine, and the segregated world of Montgomery could have returned to normal. But as Nixon and the Durrs talked with Rosa Parks, her husband, and her mother, the question arose: Was this incident the test case they had all been waiting for? In Brown v. Board of Education the year before, the Supreme Court had ruled that segregated schools were illegal. But what about transportation? If she were willing, if she could overcome her husband Raymond’s fear that, “The white folks will kill you, Rosa,” there could not be a better person than Rosa Parks for the test case they all sought.
Parks had a long history as a civil rights activist. She first tried to register to vote in 1943 when only a very tiny percentage of Alabama blacks voted. She was told she did not pass the literacy test. The same thing happened in 1944. In 1945, she hand-copied every question on the literacy test while she was taking it, in an obvious first step toward a legal challenge. Apparently, the authorities wanted to avoid a legal challenge more than they wanted to avoid her vote. She received her registration in the mail and began voting in Alabama elections in 1946. In the summer of 1955, Parks attended a desegregation workshop at Highlander. “I was forty-two years old, and it was one of the few times in my life up to that point when I did not feel any hostility from white people,” Parks said.
Given her background, many have wondered whether Parks’s action on the bus had been planned. She insisted it had not. But her life had prepared her for what happened. A few months later, Parks said, “There had to be a stopping place, and this seemed to have been the place for me to stop being pushed around and to find out what human rights I had, if any.”
Parks, Nixon, and the Durrs retained a young African-American lawyer, Fred Gray, as her attorney. Nixon began calling the local ministers. The new minister at Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Martin Luther King, Jr., was third on his list. Among the people Gray called that evening was Jo Ann Gibson Robinson, a professor at Montgomery’s all black Alabama State College and a leader in the black Women s Political Caucus (WPC) in Montgomery, who remembered, “Telephones jangled; people congregated on street corners and in homes and talked....[but] A numbing helplessness seemed to paralyze everyone.” Without consulting other leaders, Robinson and the WPC decided to call a boycott of the Montgomery buses when
Chapter 25 Complacenc
lange 735
I
Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)
The leading clergy-led voice of the southern, nonviolent Civil Rights Movement, founded in 1957 by Martin Luther King, Jr., and some 60 other black ministers, many veterans of the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
Parks went on trial. She, another professor, and two students pretended that they needed to grade papers and went to their offices in the middle of the night. By 4 a.m. the next morning, using the school’s mimeograph machine, they had prepared thousands of leaflets that said:
Another Negro woman has been arrested and thrown in jail because she refused to get up out of her seat on the bus for a white person to sit down....
This has to be stopped... We are, therefore, asking every Negro to stay off the buses Monday in protest.
Between 4 a.m. and 7 a.m., Robinson and her students distributed the leaflets. They finished in time for Robinson to teach her 8 a.m. class on schedule and then distributed more leaflets.
Robinson’s leaflet fell into the hands of the white Montgomery Advertiser, which published news of the plan on its front page on Saturday, inadvertently helping the campaign along. The story was meant to inform the white community what was afoot, but it also meant that every black knew about the boycott. Nearly all of Montgomery’s blacks stayed off the buses that first day. At a planning meeting on Monday afternoon, Martin Luther King, Jr., then 26 years old, was elected president of what would be called the Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA). As president, King was the main speaker at a Monday evening service. He called on Montgomery’s African-American community to protest with courage and dignity. After King’s sermon, Ralph Abernathy, minister of Montgomery’s First Baptist Church proposed that the boycott continue until the demands—courteous treatment by the bus operators and the seating of passengers on a first-come, first-served basis, whites from the front, blacks from the back—were met. Segregation itself was not yet challenged, only the kind of humiliating enforcement of segregation experienced by Parks. From that evening it was clear; it was not to be a one-day boycott. People would wait as long as it took.
Ultimately, it took a year-long boycott of the Montgomery buses to win the victory the black community wanted, and it took a combination of careful planning and inspirational preaching to get there. People needed courage and inspiration, but they also needed taxis and car pools to get them to work. Black-owned taxis offered reduced fares. The ministers organized car pools to help people who needed to go the longest distances.
The nation’s black leadership was not enthusiastic about events in Montgomery. The Montgomery bus boycott was a spontaneous outburst that national leaders had played no role in organizing. Roy Wilkins, the long-time national leader of the NAACP invited King to address the NAACP convention in San Francisco, but also expressed deep doubts about the boycott. Thurgood Marshall openly criticized King, preferring to stick with court cases. “All that walking for nothing. They might as well have waited for the court decision,” Marshall said of the boycott.
But as the year wore on, the boycott had its impact. The boycott received favorable national media attention. Fundraising became easier, and King found himself becoming a national celebrity. The aged W.E.B. Du Bois wrote that, though he still had his doubts about boycotts, if King’s passive resistance could undermine American racism, it would be a huge victory. On June 4, an appeals court ruled in favor of Rosa Parks, and on November 13, 1956, the United States Supreme Court concurred. Early in the morning of December 21, 1956, 1 year and 3 weeks after Rosa Parks had refused to move, King and a few others, followed by reporters, boarded the first bus of the day. “We are glad to have you,” the polite driver said.
In January 1957, King, Abernathy, and some 60 black ministers created the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, based in Atlanta, Georgia. The MIA had been a temporary organization focused on the bus boycott. The SCLC institutionalized the energy and the planning that had started in Montgomery and created a permanent national organization and a long-term platform for King.

736
Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
■Ill
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Many Faces of the Civil Rights Movement
Rosa Parks' refusal to give up her bus seat in Montgomery,
Alabama, in December 1955 led to a year-long boycott of the buses, launched the career of a young Montgomery minister, Martin Luther King, Jr., and changed the course of American history. But the boycott worked only because of many who never became famous.
Besides Parks and King, some among the many who made the Montgomery boycott a national event:
• Claudette Colvin—A young African-American who was arrested for refusing to give up her seat on a bus 9 months before Parks but who local leaders thought was not the right candidate for a test case because she was pregnant and unmarried. Her legal appeal was later combined with that of Rosa Parks.
E.D.
Nixon—A long-time civil rights and union activist who commanded great respect in black and white communities in Montgomery. • Clifford and Virginia Durr—White residents of Montgomery who had long supported civil rights for African-Americans at considerable personal cost and who had national connections to help the local organizers.
• Fred Gray—Then a 24-year-old lawyer in Montgomery who represented Rosa Parks. Gray had gone to law school with a private promise "to become a lawyer, return to Alabama, and destroy everything segregated I could find."
• Jo Ann Gibson Robinson and the Members of the Women's Political Caucus—Were already urging male civil rights leaders to protest Montgomery's segregated buses.
• Ralph Abernathy—A respected senior minister and an officer of the NAACP who convinced King to support the bus boycott.
• Mother Pollard—An elderly member of King's congregation who responded to her pastor's concern that she was too old to keep walking, replying, "My feets is tired but my soul is rested." • And thousands of additional residents of Montgomery-Committed supporters who attended rallies, organized alternative forms of transportation, or simply walked to and from work for a year rather than break the boycott.
In thinking about how best to teach the history of the Civil Rights Movement, Diana Turk, a professor at New York University, said:
Ask most middle- and secondary-level students what they have learned about the Civil Rights Movement, and most likely they will tell you a story of great leaders who, through their bravery, and inspiring words, led millions to stand with them in the struggles for freedom, equality, and Civil Rights....But...as engaging and inspiring as this tale of brave and inspiring leaders may be, much is lost when we look at history as a story of only a few individuals and their acts of heroism. As Dr. Adam Green, an historian of the black Civil Rights Movement in the United States, importantly argues, great leaders don't get very far unless they have great organizers behind them; someone needs to plan and announce boycotts and marches, set up rallies, arrange for speeches and press coverage, and spread the word about the events that together make up movements....Not only can a focus on organizers give students a sense of some of the important—and often forgotten— forces that helped shape history, but such an approach also can empower students to see how seemingly small, localized, and unheralded actions can truly change the course of human events.
Source: Diana Turk, Rachel Mattson, Terrie Epstein, and Robert Cohen, Teaching U.S. History: Dialogues Among Social Studies Teachers and Historians (New York: Routledge, 2010).
Thinking Critically
1.	Historical Interpretation
What role did each of the figures described above play in the boycott? How did their efforts reinforce each other?
2.	Construct an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: "The Montgomery bus boycott proves that the most important social change is produced by action on the local level."
tudents and Sit-Ins
>n February 1, 1960, 3 years after the buses in Montgomery were integrated and as )hn F. Kennedy battled to win presidential primaries, four African-American fresh-ten at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College sat down at the whites-only meh counter of the Woolworth’s store in Greensboro, North Carolina. They asked olitely for service and ordered coffee. After sitting at the counter all day, they still had ot received their orders. Nineteen students joined the sit-in the next day, and on the lird day, they numbered 85. On the fourth day, more than 300 people joined the sit-in,
Chapter 25 Complacency and Chi
>7
expanding it to another stores lunch counter. This group action was not a well-planned event. The established civil rights leaders in neither the NAACP nor King s SCLC had been involved and, indeed, knew nothing of it until after the fact. They struggled to decide whether to support, ignore, or lead the sit-ins. But it didn’t matter what they did. The student-led sit-ins that started in Greensboro spread like wildfire across the South.
Before February ended, there were sit-ins in 31 cities in eight southern states. One of the largest and longest took place in Nashville, Tennessee. After hearing of the Greensboro actions, over 500 well-dressed African-American college students walked into downtown Nashville and sat down at lunch counters in all of the major stores. The Nashville police allowed a mob to beat many of the demonstrators, and more than 60 protesters were jailed in Nashville. The mayor sought compromise and agreed to appoint a biracial committee to look at segregation in the stores. The appointment of the committee was a victory long sought by Nashville’s older civil rights leaders, and it had been won by the students. By July, the lunch counters in Greensboro had also become desegregated.
While many of King’s peers were not sure what to make of the sit-ins, and the NAACP Legal Defense Fund was not willing to defend those arrested, King endorsed them, seeing the sit-ins as a way to confront segregation nonviolently and directly. He continued to defend the sit-ins to an older and very wary civil rights community, and the sit-ins continued to grow in significance.
From Freedom Rides to Birmingham to Washington—"I Have a Dream/1963
While the sit-ins continued, the U.S. Supreme Court in a 1960 ruling, Boynton v. Virginia declared that any segregation in interstate transportation was unconstitutional. James Farmer and others in the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) decided to test the decision with “freedom rides” to hasten integration of interstate bus service
The lunch counter sit-ins, launched by these students at a segregated lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, in February 1960, began a new and powerful phase of the Civil Rights Movement.
738 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
and terminals through the South. They warned the Attorney General and the FBI in advance. When the seven blacks and six whites on the two buses began their trip in May 1961, they encountered violence first in Rock Hill, South Carolina, where John Lewis was beaten when trying to enter a white rest room, then in Anniston, Alabama, where one of the buses was burned and most of the riders beaten. All of the riders were beaten again when a bus reached Birmingham, Alabama—one white rider so badly he suffered permanent brain damage. An FBI informer had reported Ku Klux Kian plans to attack the Freedom Riders, but at no point did they get any federal protection. New riders who joined the effort were also beaten and arrested. Eventually, 328 Freedom Riders were arrested in the summer of 1961.
When the new Kennedy administration called for a “cooling-off” period, Farmer responded that “blacks have been cooling off for 150 years. If we cool off any more, we’ll be in a deep freeze.” Finally in the fall, Attorney General Robert Kennedy convinced the Interstate Commerce Commission to order that any bus or train that crossed a state line (and thus under the Constitution became subject to federal rules) could not use any segregated facilities.
In September 1962, James Meredith became the first black to enroll at the University of Mississippi, backed by a federal court order. In response, Mississippi governor Ross Barnett promised that “No school will be integrated in Mississippi while I am your governor.” Robert Kennedy thought he had a promise from Barnett to keep order on the campus, but when Barnett instead whipped up a crowd of some 3,000 whites who began throwing rocks and eventually shooting, Kennedy sent federal marshals and then federal troops, who restored order at the university.
Early in 1963, King began a campaign to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama, perhaps the most segregated city in the South. He expected resistance. King was promptly arrested during a protest—and used the time to write one of his most famous publications, “Letter from Birmingham Jail.” The Birmingham police, under their chief “Bull” Connor also arrested some 3,000 protesting children and turned fire hoses and attack dogs on children and adults. Civil rights organizers also met with violent resistance elsewhere. Medgar Evers, the NAACP field secretary in Jackson, Mississippi, was murdered on his front porch that June. Riots erupted in northern cities in July. Who knew what was coming next?
LM
j

The Birmingham, Alabama, police force used dogs to attack Civil Rights demonstrators, a response that brought worldwide condemnation.
Chapter 25 Complacency anc
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
Black civil rights organization founded in 1960 that drew heavily on younger activists and college students.
Widespread television coverage brought an international outcry about the violence in Birmingham, including criticism by the Soviet Union. President Kennedy, who had been slow to act on civil rights, but feared bad publicity especially in the context of the Cold War, introduced his long-promised civil rights bill in June 1963. Kennedy told Congress that “The heart of the question is whether all Americans are to be afforded equal rights and equal opportunities.” To support the proposed civil rights bill, civil rights leaders A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin called for a March on Washington. On August 28, 1963, more than 20 years after Randolph first proposed a march on Washington, and 100 years after Abraham Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation, over 200,000 Americans marched in the nation s capital and listened to speeches at the Lincoln Memorial.
The keynote address of the March on Washington was delivered by Martin Luther King, Jr. In words that have become immortal, King declared his hope for America in spite of all the injustice that the Civil Rights Movement was encountering. In spite of all the setbacks, King said “I still have a dream,” that the situation in America could change. In the cadences of traditional black preachers, using words from Katherine Lee Bates, Thomas Jefferson, and the biblical prophet Isaiah, King preached the hope that, in America, black people and white people could, indeed, be sisters and brothers.
Martin Luther King’s “I Have a Dream” speech is now iconic, but in August 1963, it took courage to make that speech not only because civil rights workers and leaders were being beaten and killed, as King would be, but also because many would think such hopes foolish and empty. Even as King spoke, it was unclear whether Kennedy or the Congress would do much to expand freedom or pass a civil rights bill.
Martin Luther King, Jr., at the 1963 March on Washington.
The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and Mississippi
On Easter weekend of 1960, some of the students who had been participating in sit-ins across the South gathered at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. Ella Baker, who helped organize the Raleigh meeting, later recalled, “Just as the sit-ins had skyrocketed or escalated without rhyme or reason, so too the response to the concept of a conference escalated beyond our expectations.” James Lawson, who had played a major role in the sit-in movement in Nashville and had been expelled from the Vanderbilt University Divinity School for his efforts, also joined the Raleigh conference. He told the students that their actions were “a judgment upon middle-class conventional, halfway efforts to deal with radical social evil.” The students voted to form their own organization rather than affiliate with either the SCLC or the NAACR Thus, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) was born.
No one did more to shape SNCC than Ella Baker. Baker had worked for the NAACP in the 1940s. Martin Luther King recruited her to the SCLC in the 1950s, but she found herself deeply frustrated by the male dominance of the minister-led SCLC. Her own philosophy was that “People have to be made to understand that they cannot look for salvation anywhere but to themselves.” John Lewis, the youngest speaker at the March on Washington and another SNCC founder, said We all recognize the fact that if any radical social, political, and economic changes are to take place in our society, the people, the masses must bring them about.” Like many in SNCC, Lewis was distrustful of any single charismatic leader, even King. In the sit-in movement and in SNCC, Baker and Lewis found like-minded souls.
740 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Bob Moses arrived in Atlanta in the summer of 1960 to volunteer with SNCC during his vacation from his job as a teacher in New York City. As Moses traveled through the rural South, he met some amazing people like Amzie Moore who lived far from the centers of civil rights activity. Moses described meeting Moore:
He was the only adult I met on this trip who had clearly fixed the students in his sights. It was as if he had been sitting there in Cleveland [Mississippi] watching the student movement unfold, waiting for it to come his way, knowing it had to eventually come, and planning ways to use it in light of his fifteen year effort, since World War II, at making changes in the cotton plantation land of the Mississippi delta.
Moses would encounter more people like Moore on his travels, and they changed him.
Moses learned that while Moore appreciated the legal work of the NAACP, integration was not his priority. His passion was the vote. Living in a congressional district that was two-thirds black, it was obvious to Moore what the vote could do. Moses wrote to the SNCC office in Atlanta, “Amzie thinks, and I concur, the adults here will back the young folks but will never initiate a program strong enough to do what needs to be done.” Thus was born SNCC’s focus on a massive student-led campaign for the vote. In 1961, Moses returned to Mississippi to work full time on voter registration for SNCC.
In September 1961, Herbert Lee, a supporter of the voter registration effort in Amite County, Mississippi, was shot by E. H. Hurst, a white state representative. Hurst admitted that he had shot Lee but was never prosecuted for the murder. Other murders followed.
Even when the threat of violence and murder was not imminent, people who had lived with segregation and violence all their lives were reluctant to challenge the system. In the winter of 1963-64, SNCC developed a plan to bring a thousand mostly white college students to Mississippi to help with the voter registration effort and to focus national attention on the denial of rights in Mississippi. Some SNCC field organizers worried that so many whites would undermine the strength of the black community. On the other hand, grass-roots leaders like Fannie Lou Hamer argued, “If we’re trying to break down this barrier of segregation, we can’t segregate ourselves.” In June 1964, thousands of student volunteers, white and black, arrived for what became Mississippi Freedom Summer to register local African-Americans to vote and to demonstrate to the nation what an interracial coalition looked like. They were met with considerable hostility. Three of the volunteers, James Chaney, a black, and Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, both white, were killed in late June near Philadelphia, Mississippi. There were also tensions within the movement, yet Mississippi Freedom Summer garnered national publicity for voting rights and changed the lives of many who participated.
As more blacks registered to vote, they also organized the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) to challenge the official all-white Mississippi delegation for the August 1964 Democratic Convention at which Lyndon Johnson, then president, was to be nominated for reelection. Just weeks before the national convention, hundreds of newly registered Mississippi voters, having been turned away from the regular all-white Democratic Party meetings in Mississippi, met in Jackson and elected 68 delegates to the convention.
The MFDP succeeded in raising the denial of voting rights in Mississippi to national attention even though its delegation was not seated at the national convention. The convention made Fannie Lou Hamer, a 47-year-old Mississippi sharecropper and spokeswoman for MFDP, a national voice. Bob Moses described the MFDP delegates as “sharecroppers, domestic workers, and farmers who were asking the national Democratic Party to truly be the party of such people while also taking the first step toward gaining control over their lives.
25.3
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP)
A separate Democratic delegation, launched as a result of the SNCC-led voter registration campaign, that challenged the right of the regular, all-white delegation to represent Mississippi at the 1964 Democratic Convention.
Chapter 25 Complacency
ie 741
Fannie Lou Hamer spoke to the Mississippi Freedom Party delegation after they were barred from the Democratic Convention in 1964.
American Voices
Fannie Lou Hamer, “Testimony to the Credentials Committee,” 1964
■J|>hen Fannie Lou Hamer gave her testimony at the national j/W Democratic Convention, she had come a long way from a SNCC voter registration meeting. "Until then," she said, "Id never heard of no mass meeting and I didn't know that a Negro could register and vote.... When they asked for those to raise their hands who'd go down to the courthouse the next day, I raised mine. Had it up as high as I could get it."
It was the 31st of August in 1962 that eighteen of us traveled twenty-six miles to the county courthouse in Indianola [Mississippi] to try to register to become first-class citizens.
We was met in Indianola by policemen, Highway Patrolmen, and they only allowed two of us in to take the literacy test at the time. After we had taken this test...we continued on to Ruleville...where I had worked as a timekeeper and sharecropper for eighteen years. I was met there by my children, who told me that the plantation owner was angry because I had gone down to try to register....
He said, "If you don't go down and withdraw your registration, you will have to leave." Said, "Then if you go down and withdraw," said, "you still might have to go because we are not ready for that in Mississippi."
And I addressed him and told him and said, "I didn't try to register for you. I tried to register for myself."
I had to leave that same night....
[Hamer also described her subsequent arrest:]
I was carried to the county jail and putin the booking room....
I was carried out of that cel, into another cell where they had
two Negro prisoners. The State Highway Patrolmen ordered the first Negro to take the blackjack [a wooden club].
The first Negro prisoner ordered me, by orders from the State Highway Patrolman, for me to lay down on a bunk bed on my face.
I laid on my face and the first Negro began to beat...I began to scream and one white man got up and began to beat me in my head and tell me to hush....
I was in jail when Medgar Evers was murdered.
Al, of this is on account of we want to register, to become first-class citizens. And if the Freedom Democratic Party is not seated now, I question America. Is this America, the land of the free and the home of the brave, where we have to sleep with our telephones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily, because we want to live as decent human beings, in America? Thankyou.
Source: http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/sayitplain/flhamer.html, downloaded, July 8 2011
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What light does the document shed on Hamer's motives in registering to vote?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What do Hamer's experiences suggest about the nature of white resistance to the Civil Rights Movement?

742 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
The North and Malcolm X
By the 1960s, half of the nations African-Americans lived in the North, most in racially segregated urban neighborhoods. While the hopes of blacks in the South generally focused on ending the brutal segregation and on winning the right to vote, the hopes of northern blacks focused on ending segregated housing patterns, poor quality schooling, and economic marginalization. One of the most prominent voices for northern urban blacks was Malcolm X. As Marcus Garvey had done for a previous generation, Malcolm spoke of pride, self-sufficiency, and self-determination.
Malcolm was born Malcolm Little in Omaha, Nebraska, in 1925. He remembered the grinding poverty, racism, and violence of Depression Era America.
As a young adult, Malcolm pursued a life of crime and in February 1946, just before his 21 birthday, received a 10-year sentence for a string of burglaries. In his Autobiography he said, “I had sunk to the very bottom of the American white man’s society.”
While he was in prison, Malcolm experienced a religious conversion and joined the Nation of Islam, or the Black Muslims as they were commonly known. When he was released in 1952, he moved to Detroit and was soon named assistant minister at Detroit Temple Number One. The Black Muslims believed that it was important to reject traditional last names—which they saw as slave names since many came from former slave owners—and so Malcolm Little became Malcolm X. His message as a minister was, “We didn’t land on Plymouth Rock, my brothers and sisters—Plymouth Rock landed on us!... It was a mix of pride and separation from white people— the “white devils”—along with a call for total allegiance to Allah and Allah’s Messenger Elijah Muhammad.
Malcolm disdained integration and the southern Civil Rights Movement. While he was gaining fame as “the fiery Black Muslim,” Malcolm was also starting to have his doubts about Elijah Muhammad. Early in 1964, he broke with the Nation of Islam and set off on a pilgrimage to Mecca as is required of every devout Muslim man. In Mecca, Malcolm found himself among Muslims from all over the world. He was transformed by the experience. When a fellow pilgrim asked him what about the Hajj had impressed him the most, Malcolm answered, “The brotherhood'. The people of all races, colors, from all over the world coming together as one'. It has proved to me the power of the One God.” No longer would he preach separation for its own sake. He was not any less militant, but Malcolm returned from Mecca as El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz, a devout traditional Muslim.
When he returned to New York in 1964, Malcolm explained his new beliefs. He said of his experience in Mecca, “In the past, yes, I have made sweeping indictments of all white people. I never will be guilty of that again—as I know now that some white people are truly sincere, that some truly are capable of being brotherly toward a black man.” He was willing to join interracial coalitions to achieve immediate goals and would work within as well as against the political system.
Malcolm was not willing to adopt King’s nonviolence and believed African-Americans needed to defend themselves. In 1964, he met Fannie Lou Hamer. When he heard her describe the beating she had received, he said, When I listened to Mrs. Hamer, a black woman—could be my mother, my sister, my daughter describe what they had done to her in Mississippi, I asked myself how in the world can we ever expect to be respected.. .and we do nothing about it? He was not the advocate of violence that others portrayed him to be, but at one point he said, Let sincere whites go and teach non-violence to white people!”
After his break with the Nation of Islam, he established his own independent Muslim Mosque Incorporated to preach what he believed was a truer Islam than that taught by the Black Muslims. He also established a political organization,
Chapter 25 Complacency am
Explore The Civil Rights Movement on MyHistoryLab
HOW DID CONDITIONS FOR AFRICAN-AMERICANS BEGIN TO CHANGE IN THE MID-1900S?
Laws in the South known as "Jim Crow laws"—regulations that banned African-Americans and whites from, for example, marrying, dining, going to school, or socializing together—ensured racial discrimination. In the North, segregation undergirded the social structure. However, African-American leaders started to make advancements in their fight for equality in the 1950s and 1960s. Civil rights activists protested across the South, making national headlines. In the industrial cities of the North and West, large numbers of African-Americans arrived in the Second Great Migration between 1940 and 1970 as they sought better opportunities than the South afforded them. From these cities, many also began to speak out for an end to racism.
Young black man drinking from a segregated drinking fountain.
SHIFTS IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN POPULATION IN SELECTED COUNTIES,
1940-1950 County	Change, in Persons	Percent Change |
Columbia County, Georgia	-1,108	-20
Cook County, Illinois	+226,822	+60
Los Angeles County, California	+142,672	+94
Quitman County, Mississippi	-2,416 I	-9
Wayne County, Michigan	|	+172,122	+70
Source: 1950 Census, Historic GIS Data: Slavery, Citizenship, & Civil Rights, Teaching American History Project, http://www.upa.pdx.edu/IMS/currentprojects/TAHv3/Slave_Citizen_GIS.htmi.
KEY QUESTIONS
use MyHistoryLab Explorer to answer these questions: Cause ►►► What challenges did African Americans face during the era of segregation?
Use socioeconomic patterns to consider discrimination.
Comparison ►►► In what parts of southern cities did African Americans live?
Map segregation in selected urban centers.
Consequence ►►► What was the demographic impact of the Second Great Migration?
Consider the results of this move to the urban North and West.
744 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
the Organization of Afro-American Unity (OAAU) to advance his political agenda. His top priority, he said, was to submit “the case of the American Negro before the United Nations. Rather than focus on federal legislation, Malcolm believed that African-Americans had a case to bring their continuing marginalization before the UN, and with the support of African and Middle Eastern nations, he was confident they would win.
More important than any organization, however, Malcolm fostered a new sense of pride in a generation of northern African-Americans. He challenged the quality of education in black communities. He led demonstrations against police violence. He called on African-Americans to “control the politics in his own residential areas by voting... and investing in the businesses.” He had a vision of African-Americans making international alliances with the people of the then newly independent African nations and with the Muslim world. As the scholar Manning Marable said of him, ‘ Malcolm s great strength was his ability to speak on behalf of those to whom society and state had denied a voice due to racial prejudice.”
The new Malcolm was willing to accept white coworkers, but not to be led or controlled. He dreamed that the day might come when, “In our mutual sincerity we might be able to show a road to the salvation of America’s very soul.” Malcolm was assassinated by Nation of Islam followers in February 1965. But he would continue to inspire great hopes long after he was gone.
Malcolm X (1925-1965) was eloquent, passionate, a courageously outspoken champion of black people, and a critic of American racism. Today he is an iconic figure memorialized in poems, song, films, books, and operas.
Quick Review Why were organizations like SNCC, CORE, the SCLC, and the NAACP essential to the Civil Rights Movement?
CONCLUSION
The 1950s was a decade of contrasts. For many, they were the complacent decade when Dwight Eisenhower presided over a nation that had won World War II and was happy to move to new suburban homes and domestic contentment. At the same time, threat of the hydrogen bomb greatly influenced U.S. foreign and domestic policy throughout the 1950s, and the space race with the Soviet Union prompted Americans to panic about the state of its education system. Among African-Americans, the many-faceted Civil Rights Movement transformed their lives and U.S. practices of segregation.
During the Eisenhower administration (1953-1961), the United States pursued policies that attempted to minimize the costs of the Cold War, protect the non-Communist world from Communist infiltration, and avoid armed confrontation. Key pieces of Eisenhower’s foreign policy included the threat of “massive retaliation with hydrogen bombs and the extensive use of spying and covert operations in foreign countries. When the Soviet Union launched the first space satellite, the American government responded by creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to manage space exploration and by establishing new domestic programs linking education to national defense.
The 1950s were relative peaceful and prosperous for many Americans. The economy continued to grow, and many experienced a substantial increase in family income. Americans also became much more religious during the period a phenomenon still not fully understood. At the same time, television came to dominate American popular culture. Most of the programming of the 1950s sought to reaffirm the suburban lifestyles of the white middle class, and new 30-second television commercials encouraged Americans to buy everything from Alka-Seltzer to automobiles. The automobile also rose to prominence in 1950s America, giving rise to new industries to support cars and to an interstate highway system. However, America s love affair with the automobile required a steady supply of cheap gasoline-an issue that would come to dominate American politics.
Chapter 25 Complacence
745
In the 1950s, although segregation, marginalization, and political disenfranchisement were commonplace for African-Americans, the modern Civil Rights Movement came into full swing. After decades of court challenges by the NAACP, the U.S. Supreme Court finally ruled in 1954 that racial segregation of public schools was unconstitutional. Civil rights protesters also successfully boycotted segregation of the public transportation system in Montgomery, Alabama, and of lunch counters across the nation.
While the Southern Christian Leadership Conference and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee worked for integration and voting rights in the South, a very different civil rights leader emerged in the North. Malcolm X became a prominent northern voice for the nation’s African-Americans. He rejected the integration-focused strategy of southern civil rights leaders and spoke of pride, self-sufficiency, and self-determination for blacks free from white interference. Malcolm was assassinated in February 1965, but the Civil Rights Movement, led largely by Martin Luther King, Jr., continued to press for full equality throughout the 1960s.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
In what ways was the United States a different country in 1960 than in 1950? How did domestic and international events influence these changes in American society?
746 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
Chapter 25 Chapter Review
25.1
EISENHOWER'S AMERICA, AMERICA'S WORLD______________________
Explain the continuation of the Cold War under a new Republican administration.
Review Questions
1.	Contextualization
What were Eisenhower’s overarching foreign policy objectives? How successful was he in achieving those objectives?
2.	Cause and Effect
What were the most important long-term consequences of the Soviet launch of the Sputnik satellite?
3.	Historical Interpretation
Why did the United States and the Soviet Union find it so difficult to move past their mutual distrust and build a less confrontational relationship?
A CULTURE ON THE MOVE______________________________________
Explain the impact of cultural and technological changes on the country.
Review Questions
4.	Cause and Effect
What were the most important consequences of the surge in automobile ownership in the 1950s?
25.2
253
5.	Historical Interpretation
How did television transform American culture in the 1950s?
6.	Create an Argument
How would you explain the religious boom of the 1950s?
RACE AND CIVIL RIGHTS_____________________________________
Analyze the growth and impact of the civil rights movement between 1954 and 1965.
Review Questions
7.	Contextualization
Why was Rosa Parks an ideal person to challenge Montgomery bus segregation?
8.	Historical Interpretation
How did students and other young people shape the Civil Rights Movement of the early 1960s?
9.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. What were the most important similarities and differences in their responses to racial discrimination and segregation?
Chapter 25 Complacen
Lives Changed
This widely publicized picture of an antiwar demonstrator putting a flower in the end of a rifle at the October 1967 March on the Pentagon reflects some of the deepest divisions of the 1960s.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of the unique time known as "the sixties."
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
26.1
NEW VOICES, NEW AUTHORITIES
Explain the growing social protest in books, films, and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
26.2
263
CAMELOT, THE WHITE HOUSE, AND DALLAS—THE KENNEDY ADMINISTRATION
Analyze the successes and failures of the Kennedy administration and how they interacted with popular culture in the United States.
THE COMING OF LYNDON B. JOHNSON
Analyze the successes and failures of the Johnson administration in terms of the two issues that dominated his years in office—the launching of the Great Society programs and the war in Vietnam.
In 1960 while Kennedy and Nixon contested the presidency, a handful of white students organized Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). SDS represented a new birth of activism on the part of white young people just as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) had given voice to the activism of African-American students (see Chapter 25). The birth of groups like SDS and SNCC guaranteed that the 1960s would not be as quiet as the 1950s. As Bob Dylan, the best known folk singer of the early 1960s sang, “The times they are a changing.”
Student protesters and folk singers were far from the only signs that something new was brewing in American culture after 1960. New literature signaled the change that was coming. Between 1961 and 1963, three women authors published books challenging fundamental issues: Jane Jacobs, the way cities were developing; Rachel Carson, the pollution of the environment; and Betty Friedan, the “quiet desperation” of many women’s lives. They were not alone; authors increasingly challenged various aspects of American life.
The new president also represented a generational change in American politics. This chapter traces the many changes that some Americans embraced, others rejected, but few ignored as the United States experienced the decade known to many simply as “the sixties.”
748 Part VIII Fears, Joys, and Limits, 1945-1980
26.1
NEW VOICES, NEW AUTHORITIES
Explain the growing social protest in books, films, and student movements starting in the early 1960s.
Though it was formative for many, the Civil Rights Movement was only one of many challenges to American culture in the 1960s. Writers and artist had often been uncomfortable with the conformity of the 1950s, and their uneasiness took on new forms as the new decade began. Small political movements burst onto a larger stage. The result was a number of books, films, and songs that reflected and helped shape a rapidly changing culture while wide-ranging protest movements, often led by students, changed not only college campuses but also the country.
Books, Films, Music
Jane Jacobs was a writer and activist in New Yorks Greenwich Village when she wrote, The Death and Life of Great American Cities in 1961. In the opening line of that book, Jacobs said, “This book is an attack on current city planning and rebuilding.” Indeed, it was an amazingly successful attack. Reflecting on the books impact, one urban planner wrote, “When an entire field is headed in the wrong direction...then it probably took someone from outside to point out the obvious.” After Jacobs, city planners in New York and most cities turned away from massive highway development, sprawling suburbs, and isolated urban high-rise buildings to focus on smaller, more neighborhood friendly options. Projects to bulldoze slums and build highways were replaced in the 1960s by the redevelopment of existing urban neighborhoods. Jacobs did not bring about this change single-handedly, but her book was a guidebook to a new generation of urban planners.
Two books published in 1962 played a similar role in other movements. Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring is often called the bible of the conservation movement. Other people dating back to Theodore Roosevelt talked about conserving rather than taming nature, but Carson gave the preservation movement a new voice in the 1960s. While most earlier conservation efforts focused on protecting land from development, Carson described in graphic detail what pesticides were doing to birds and animals.
Michael Harrington’s The Other America, also published in 1962, is sometimes credited with launching the Kennedy-Johnson era War on Poverty. Harrington’s was far from the only voice urging a new look at the urban and rural poverty that had gone unnoticed in the affluent 1950s, but Harrington’s book sold over a million copies, and the critic Dwight McDonald convinced President Kennedy to read it. In his own way, Harrington, like Carson and Jacobs, put a human face on an otherwise easily ignored domestic issue. Describing the way poverty was hidden in modern America cities, Harrington wrote, “The poor still inhabit the miserable housing in the central area....The failures, the unskilled, the disabled, the aged, and the minorities are right there, across the tracks, where they have always been. But hardly anyone else is... .They have no face; they have no voice.” The War on Poverty began to change that situation in 1964 and 1965.
