Chapter 10 Democracyinthe Age of Andrew Jackson 273
nullification
A constitutional doctrine holding that a state has a legal right to declare a national law null and void within its borders.
Martin Van Buren, architect of Jackson’s 1828 campaign for president, became secretary of state. But Jackson’s other cabinet officers were less talented, and Jackson often ignored them. Instead, he surrounded himself with informal advisors who came to be known as his “Kitchen Cabinet,” longtime friends and advisors who worked closely with the president, particularly to accomplish removing Indians from wanted lands, revoking the charter for the Second Bank of the United States, and preserving the authority of the federal union against radical supporters of states rights. Jackson's Presidential Agenda
Jackson had several interlocking, but not entirely consistent, priorities. He distrusted government at all levels but had unbounded trust in his own ability to govern. He meant not only to be an activist president—John Quincy Adams and other presidents had also followed strong agendas—but also to make the presidency the center of the American government. He would not defer to Congress in ways that all of his predecessors had done. He vetoed more congressional bills than all of his predecessors combined and made it clear that Congress would have to reckon with him. As he had announced before the election, he was determined to force the Indians who lived in northern Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi to move west to clear the land for white settlement. Although he supported a modified tariff, he meant to scale back the size of the federal government. He hated the Bank of the United States and was determined to destroy it. He saw its charter as an inappropriate use of federal authority and was convinced, probably rightly, that the bank had contributed to Adams’s campaign. And perhaps most of all, Jackson was determined to preserve the Union at a time when southern leaders were insisting that each state had the right of nullification, the right to declare that specific federal legislation was null and void within its borders. Jackson was a slaveholder and a defender of slavery, but if slaveholders threatened national unity, they would have to deal with him.
In his two terms as president, Jackson realized most of his goals, despite fierce opposition. He established permanent precedents for presidential authority. He was a hero to some and an evil genius to others. For most historians, he remains one of the most complex American leaders, expanding the roles of poor and working-class whites in the political process and of the presidency in American life, while reducing the rights of Indians, slaves, federal employees, bankers, and indeed anyone who disagreed with him.
Five Civilized Tribes
The Cherokees, Chickasaws, Choctaws, Creeks, and Seminoles, who had established treaty agreements with the United States in the late 1700s or early 1800s, lived in peace with their neighbors and adopted more of the ways of the whites than most Native Americans.
The Indian Removal Act, the Trail of Tears, and the Settlement of Oklahoma
For some white Americans, “Indian Removal”—Jacksons policy of forcing the Cherokee Nation and other tribes to move to reservations in distant Oklahoma, or Indian Territory as it was called, was a great achievement. For the tribes caught in Jacksons web, the policy led to war within the tribes, terrible losses, resistance, resignation, and reinvention. Their white supporters, though passionate, were ineffective against Jackson.
Known as the Five Civilized Tribes, the Cherokees, Chickasaws, Choctaws, Creeks, and Seminoles had for generations lived in the region known as the Old Southwest—Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi—as well as in Arkansas, and Florida. These tribes had traded and fought with Spanish, French, and English settlers and had sold or ceded much of their land, but based on treaties with the U.S. government, they still owned huge tracts of land in the heart of the cotton-growing South.
Far more than the Indians of the Northwest or the West, the Five Civilized Tribes had adopted many white ways and customs, intermarried with whites, and created a unique culture based on farming and trade. Of the five tribes, the Cherokee Nation had the most sophisticated political, economic, and cultural institutions. Stretching over northwest Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, and North Carolina,
274 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
the Cherokees expected to be treated as a sovereign country. The Cherokees, who had supported the British during the Revolution, had signed a treaty with the new United States government in 1785 and never again waged war against the United States. They supported Jackson in his battle with the Creeks and lived at peace with their neighbors, but that did them little good once Jackson determined his course of action.
After making peace with the United States in the 1780s, the Cherokees took well to the European-style of communication and farming. In 1821, a Cherokee warrior, Sequoyah, intrigued by what he called the “markings” of written English, invented an 86-character alphabet that represented the syllables of spoken Cherokee. The new alphabet caught on quickly, not only in handwritten form but also in typeface for printing. The Cherokee Phoenix, published in both English and Cherokee, became an important means of communication. Sequoyah, who never learned English, created a similar alphabet for the Choctaw language. His achievement to invent a written language while being illiterate in all languages had never before been done. In addition, the Cherokees set up a large and effective trading network with other tribes and the white community. In 1827, they adopted a written constitution for the Cherokee Republic.
Beginning in the 1790s, Christian missionaries came to live among the Cherokees. The Cherokees welcomed them, though most never became Christians. Using Sequoyah’s alphabet, the missionaries translated the Bible into Cherokee and later became some of the most heroic defenders of Cherokee rights.
Cherokees also cultivated cotton as their white neighbors did, and some owned African slaves. An 1825 census counted 13,563 Cherokees, 220 whites (some of whom were married to Cherokees), and 1,277 African slaves in the Cherokee Republic. Of all the American Indian tribes, the Cherokees were the model of assimilation that presidents from Washington to Jefferson claimed to want. But white settlers and President Jackson decided to ignore the assimilation. They wanted the land.
Georgia took the lead in seizing Indian land. In 1824, Governor George Troup announced that he was ending treaty rights for the Cherokee and Creek tribes. When President John Quincy Adams opposed him, citing the tribes’ treaties with the U.S. government, Troup and his successor, John Forsyth, campaigned for Jackson in 1828. In December 1828, the Georgia legislature declared that, starting in June 1830, Georgia state laws would extend to all parts of the Cherokee Republic despite federal treaty agreements to the contrary. White Georgians then began moving onto Cherokee lands, and Jackson withdrew U.S. troops that had been protecting the Cherokees.
It was in this context that Jackson addressed Congress, advocating an Indian Removal Act to “protect” the Cherokees from Georgia laws. The president gave the tribes what seemed like a choice: “voluntarily” move west to new lands where their independence would be honored or choose to stay where they were. But if they chose to stay, they would be subject to the laws of Georgia, laws that said Indians could not vote, own property, testify against a white person in court, or obtain credit. It was not much of a choice, as Jackson himself said in private.
The land that the government offered the tribes was completely unfamiliar to the tribes of the Old Southwest. Most people thought of it as simply a desert where farming would be impossible. Indian Territory, which eventually became the state of Oklahoma, was a portion of the Louisiana Purchase just north of Texas. The land was not empty, though the government tended to treat it that way. Some of the plains tribes—the Wichitas, Kiowas, Kiowa Apaches, and especially Osages—had lived there for generations. Some tribes from the Ohio-Illinois area—Shawnees, Delawares (Lenapes), Miamis, Kickapoos, Sacs, and Fox—had been relocated to that territory after defeats by the U.S. Army. In addition, there were a few white settlers and some slaves and former slaves seeking refuge in the region. Nevertheless, under Jackson’s plan, the government was now offering the territory to the Cherokees and others of the Five Civilized Tribes (see Map 10-1).
While Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, Choctaw, and Seminole leaders had long feared just such a move and had been protesting against it, many whites now rallied to their side. In Congress and the national press, Indian Removal became a major fight.
Chapter 10
Sequoyah was intrigued with the way reading seemed to give whites power. He created an alphabet for the Cherokee language and, later, a similar one for the Choctaw language.
Indian Removal Act
Legislation passed by Congress in 1830 which provided funds for removing and resettling eastern Indians in the West. It granted the president the authority to use force if necessary and resulted in the involuntary transfer of thousands of Native Americans to new homes in Oklahoma.
Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 275
10*1
Land granted to Indians west of the Mississippi River Date and route of removal
MAP 10-1 Indian Removal. While Indian Removal began with the forced relocation of the Sac and Fox tribes from Illinois and Iowa, by far the largest relocation of tribes took place when the five Indian nations who were living in large territories in Georgia, Alabama, Florida, and Mississippi were forced far to the west to the newly created Indian Territory.
Catharine Beecher, a reformer associated with many causes, organized women across the Northwest to defend Indian rights and flooded Congress with petitions. Missionaries campaigned against the bill so vigorously that Georgia sentenced two of them to prison at hard labor for refusing to abandon the Indians.
In the Senate, Theodore Frelinghuysen of New Jersey, long a supporter of Protestant missionaries and reform efforts, led the opposition to the Indian Removal Bill. Frelinghuysen insisted that the government was bound by its treaties and that, if need be, should use the U.S. Army to force Georgia to retract its claims to the Indian lands. Henry Clay, who had not previously spoken in favor of Indian rights, joined the antiremoval forces. In the end, the removal bill passed the Senate 28 to 19, but passed the House by only a 102-98 vote. Among those voting no was Congressman Davy Crockett of Tennessee, who called the bill “oppression with a vengeance.” But Jackson signed the law May 28, 1830, making half a century of treaties void. The tribes would have to move. While all of the tribes resisted, negotiated, and ultimately had to surrender, the Cherokees went to U.S. courts to assert their claims to their lands. Initially,
276 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10.1
American Voices
Perspectives on Indian Removal, 1818-1829
10 J
mericans responded differently to President Andrew Jackson's plan to remove American Indians from the Old Southwest to reservations west of the Mississippi. Most whites in Georgia and many elsewhere applauded. In the north, many opposed Indian Removal, and Catharine Beecher organized a petition campaign in which women petitioned Congress to stop what
they saw as an immoral process. Not surprisingly, most Cherokees, t like the other tribes involved, also opposed removal. Writing a S decade before Jackson's speech, Cherokee women demanded that [ the tribal elders not cede land to the United States. The following I three documents represent three different American voices.
Andrew Jackson, Message to Congress, December8,1829	Statements of Residents of Steubenville Ohio, February 15,1830	Cherokee Women's Petition, June 30,1818
The condition and ulterior destiny of the Indian tribes within the limits of some of our States have become objects of much interest and importance. It has long been the policy of Government to introduce among them the arts of civilization, in the hope of gradually reclaiming them from a wandering life. This policy has, however, been coupled with another wholly incompatible with its success. Professing a desire to civilize and settle them, we have at the same time lost no opportunity to purchase their lands and thrust them farther into the wilderness. By this means they have not only been kept in a wandering state, but been led to look upon us as unjust and indifferent to their fate... Our ancestors found them the uncontrolled possessors of these vast regions. By persuasion and force they have been made to retire from river to river and from mountain to mountain, until some of the tribes have become extinct and others have left but remnants to preserve for awhile their once terrible names.... Humanity and national honor demand that every effort should be made to avert so great a calamity.... As a means of effecting this end 1 suggest for your consideration the propriety of setting apart an ample district west of the Mississippi, and without the limits of any State or Territory now formed, to be guaranteed to the Indian tribes as long as they shall occupy it, each tribe having a distinct control over the portion designated for its use. There they may be secured in the enjoyment of governments of their own choice, subject to no other control from the United States than such as may be necessary to preserve peace on the frontier and between the several tribes....	THAT your memorialists are deeply impressed with the belief that the present crisis in the affairs of the Indian nations, calls loudly on all who can feel for the woes of humanity.. ..It is readily acknowledged, that the wise and venerated founders of our country's free institutions, have committed the powers of government to those whom nature and reason declare the best fitted to exercise them; and your memorialists would sincerely deprecate any presumptuous interference on the part of their own sex, with the ordinary political affairs of the country, as wholly unbecoming the character of American Females.... yet all admit that there are times when duty and affection call on us to advise and persuade, as well as to cheer or to console. And if we approach the public representatives of our husbands and brothers, only in the humble character of suppliants in the cause of mercy and humanity, may we not hope that even the small voice of female sympathy will be heard?... In despite of the undoubted natural right, which the Indians have, to the land of their forefathers, and in the face of solemn treaties, pledging the faith of the nation for their secure possession of those lands, it is intended, we are told, to force them from their native soil, and to compel them to seek new homes in a distant and dreary wilderness. To you then, as the constitutional protectors of the Indians within our territory and as the peculiar guardians of our national character, and our country's welfare, we solemnly and earnestly appeal to save this remnant of a much injured people from annihilation, to shield our country from the curses denounced on the cruel and ungrateful, and to shelter the American character from lasting dishonor.	We have called a meeting among ourselves to consult on the different points now before the council, relating to our national affairs. We have heard with painful feelings that the bounds of the land we now possess are to be drawn into very narrow limits. The land was given to us by the Great Spirit above as our common right, to raise our children upon, & to make support for our rising generations. We therefore humbly petition our beloved children, the head men & warriors, to hold out to the last in support of our common right, as the Cherokee nation have been the first settlers of this land; we therefore claim the right to the soil. We well remember that our country was formerly very extensive, but by repeated sales it has become circumscribed to the very narrow limits we have at present. Our Father the President advised us to become farmers, to manufacture our own clothes, & to have our children instructed. To this advice we have attended in everything as far as we were able. Now the thought of being compelled to remove [to] the other side of the Mississippi is dreadful to us, because it appears to us that we, by this removal, shall be brought to a savage state again, for we have, by the endeavor of our Father the President, become too much enlightened to throw aside the privileges of a civilized life. We therefore unanimously join in our meeting to hold our country in common as hitherto. Some of our children have become Christians. We have missionary schools among us. We have h[e]ard the gospel in our nation. We have become civilized & enlightened, & are in hopes that in a few years our nation will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences & arts, which are both useful & necessary in civilized society....
Sources: Andrew Jackson, Annual Message to Congress, December 8,1829, Messages and Papers of the Presidents, ed. J. D. Richardson, National Archives and Records Administration, (1896), II, 456-459 (Dec. 8,1829); Ladies of Steubenville, Ohio, Petition Against Indian removal (February 15,1830), Ellen Skinner, Women and the National Experience: Sources in Women's History, third edition (Boston: Prentice-Hall, 1996), pp.42-143; "Petition of Nancy Ward and Other Cherokee Women to the United States Congress, 19\818," in Karen L. Kilcup, editor, Native American Women's Writings, 1800-1924: An Anthology (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 29-30.
(continued)
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 277
y

r b
10.1
10 J
103
(continued)
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How did Jackson attempt to argue that Indian Removal was in the Indians' best interest? How might opponents of Indian Removal have responded to his position?
2.	Contextualization
How might the fact that two petitions in opposition to Indian Removal were written by women have affected their
reception? How might it have helped the authors'cause? How might it have hurt?
3. Contextualization
The Cherokee women say that they hope that, soon, their people "will be prepared for instruction in other branches of sciences & arts, which are both useful & necessary in civilized society." What does this statement mean? What do you think is the strongest reason they give for asking not to be moved west?
they won. In Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831) and Worcester v. Georgia (1832), the U.S. Supreme Court, under Chief Justice John Marshall, ruled that the Cherokees were a “domestic dependent nation” and could not be forced by the state of Georgia to give up land that treaty rights agreed to by the United States government had given them. Jackson simply ignored the court. Jackson is supposed to have said, “John Marshall has made his decision, now let him enforce it.” No one actually heard Jackson say that, but Jackson controlled the army and he was not about to enforce the court’s decision. No other president before or after ignored the Supreme Court in that way.
The Indian Removal Act and the implementation that followed was a disaster for the Five Civilized Tribes. The government had seized their homes and offered in return land that was thousands of miles away and completely foreign to them. Moreover the tribes were divided about how to respond. While most of the country was focused on the Cherokees, Jackson sent Secretary of War John Eaton to negotiate with the Choctaws. By excluding those he considered troublemakers and bribing others, Eaton got a small group of Choctaw leaders to agree for the tribe to leave its homes in Mississippi, but most in the tribe considered those who negotiated the removal treaty to be nonrepresentative and refused to abide by it. The federal troops enforced it anyway.
The French observer Alexis de Tocqueville, who became famous for his analysis of American life in the Jacksonian era, described the day the Choctaws crossed the Mississippi River on their way west:
At the end of 1831,1 stood on the left bank of the Mississippi... .It was then the depths of winter and the cold was exceptionally severe.. .the snow had frozen hard on the ground; the river was drifting with huge ice-floes. The Indians had brought their families with them and hauled along the wounded, the sick, newborn babies, and old men on the verge of death. They had neither tents nor wagons....I saw them embark to cross the wide river and that solemn spectacle will never be erased from my memory. Not a sob or complaint could be heard... they stood silent. Their afflictions were of long standing and they considered them beyond remedy. Already the Indians had all embarked upon the boat which was to carry them; their dogs still remained upon the bank. When these animals finally saw they were being left behind forever, they raised all together a terrible howl and plunged into the icy Mississippi to swim after their masters.
Within the decade most members of the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Creek tribes had made the same crossing. Only the Seminoles avoided their fate.
Alabama and Mississippi followed Georgia’s lead and voted to end tribal rights for the Creeks. In March 1832, the Creeks surrendered all land east of the Mississippi, and most of them moved to Oklahoma. Those that took advantage of a promise that they could stay in the East as private citizens soon lost their lands. Some of the remain-ing Creeks began violent resistance to state and federal authorities, but the so-called Second Creek War of 1836-37 ended quickly when Jackson’s secretary of war ordered federal troops to expel all Creeks from lands east of the Mississippi. The Creeks who
'8 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10,1
were deported after the Second Creek War suffered higher mortality rates than the Cherokees; perhaps half lived to see Oklahoma.
Among the Cherokees, a civil conflict broke out about how to respond to the demand that they move to Oklahoma. Principal Chief John Ross and most of the Cherokees were determined to fight for their lands. A minority, some of whom were among the rising middle class and slave holders within the tribe, decided that a compromise was better than forced expulsion. John Ridge and Elias Boudinot, publisher of the Cherokee Phoenix, signed the Treaty of New Echota in December 1835, trading land in Georgia for new land in Oklahoma and $5 million. The U.S. Senate barely ratified the treaty after Daniel Webster and Henry Clay pointed out how fraudulent it was since the majority of the Cherokees opposed it.
After Ridge and Boudinot and their followers departed for Oklahoma, or Indian Territory as it was called, the U.S. Army put most of the remaining members of the tribe in detention camps. A few were able to flee into the wilderness and remained in their homelands but without their land. Others fought, but in the end, Chief Ross and General Winfield Scott negotiated a settlement to avoid further bloodshed. Even though Jackson had left office by then, his successor, Martin Van Buren was determined to enforce his predecessor’s policy. From the detention camps, soldiers forced 12,000 Cherokee men, women, and children to march west in the fall and winter of 1838-39. It was an especially cold winter and a terrible time to make a march of over a thousand miles into the unknown. The Cherokees never had enough food, blankets, or warm clothing, and as they moved in large groups, disease and exposure took a terrible toll. On what became known as the Trail of Tears, perhaps a quarter to a third of the marchers, including Ross’s wife, died before they reached Oklahoma.
Seeing what was happening to other tribes, the Chickasaws moved west quickly on their own. The Seminoles of Florida Territory had no intention of moving, however. Although a minority of Seminoles agreed to move, most stayed in Florida, disappearing into the swamps and hiding places they knew well. When soldiers tried to force them to move, the Seminoles annihilated them. The Second Seminole War was not resolved until 1842. Fewer Seminoles than members of any other tribe ever moved to Oklahoma.
102
103
Trail of Tears
The forced march in 1838 of the Cherokee Indians from their homelands in Georgia to the Indian Territory in the West; thousands of Cherokees died along the way.
Cherokee men, women, and children, and their U.S. Army guards, rode or walked on the long march from their ancestral homes across a thousand miles to new territory in Oklahoma.
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 279
10.1
10 J
10 J
In the meantime, the Sac and Fox tribes, which had already been exiled to the Indian Territory as a result of earlier removals from the Old Northwest, were not too happy about life there. In April 1832, a chief named Black Hawk led 1,000-2,000 Sac and Fox people back east across the Mississippi, closer to their old homelands. The Sac and Fox Indians were moving mostly to escape from hostile Sioux groups on the Great Plains and Iowa Territory. The Illinois governor took the tribes move into Illinois as an attack, called out the militia, and asked for federal troops. In Black Hawk s War, federal and state troops on the east side of the Mississippi and Sioux warriors on the west virtually annihilated the Fox and Sac tribes, to the delight of whites who were happy to see these tribes completely out of their way.
In fact, Jackson had meant to use the removal law for Georgia to force all Indians east of the Mississippi out of their lands. When the forced exile finally reached its goal by the end of the 1830s, only the Iroquois in New York, a few Cherokees in North Carolina, and scattered small communities remained legally east of the Mississippi, although others like the Seminoles simply melted into the woods and could not be found by the government. All in all, 46,000 Indians were forcibly removed during the Jackson administration, and subsequent administrations removed as many more.
The Cherokees and other tribes tend to disappear from the history books after the Trail of Tears. But the Cherokees, Choctaws, and Creeks were resilient people. Forced onto an inhospitable and alien land, they sought to reestablish their communities and culture. To a surprising degree, they succeeded. As the last Cherokees arrived in Indian Territory in 1839, the tribe adopted a new Constitution and established Tahlequah as their capital. In 1844, they began publishing the Cherokee Advocate in both English and Cherokee. They also set up a school system with elementary schools as well as higher education institutes and seminaries to prepare teachers—European and Cherokee—for their schools. In the U.S. Civil War, parts of the tribe favored each side, and the divided tribe fought internally. But again they rebuilt after the war. Today, there are some 200,000 to 300,000 Cherokees, of whom 70,000 live within the Cherokee Nation in northeast Oklahoma and the rest are scattered around the country, making them the largest federally recognized tribe today.
Jacksonian Economics—The War on the Bank of the United States
The Second Bank of the United States
A national bank chartered by Congress in 1816 with extensive regulatory powers over currency and credit.
In his campaign for president, Jackson pledged to do something about the Bank of the United States, which he and many others blamed for the Panic of 1819 and saw as an elitist threat to a democracy. The Second Bank of the United States was patterned on the first Bank of the United States that had been a cornerstone of Alexander Hamilton’s economic plans for the new nation (see Chapter 7). The first bank had been chartered in 1791 for a period of 20 years. In 1811, the Jeffersonian Republicans refused to extend its charter and it closed. Henceforth, it seemed, state banks would issue currency in the form of banknotes backed by gold or silver, federal funds would be deposited in state banks, and the federal government, like everyone else, would borrow money from these banks when needed. Then came the War of 1812.
As the War of 1812 threatened to bankrupt the country, some of the nation’s richest men, led by John Jacob Astor, met with Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin and offered to loan the nation the funds it needed if the Bank of the United States were rechartered. They believed that only a national bank could build long-term prosperity and ensure that their loan would be repaid. As a result, a charter for a Second Bank of the United States passed Congress in 1816. The Madison, Monroe, and John Quincy Adams administrations were strong advocates for a unified national market economy that could foster prosperity and stability, and they had used the bank to support that economy. Jackson wanted prosperity, but he disagreed about the government’s role in the nation’s economy.
The Second Bank of the United States was never without enemies. The Constitution never mentioned a bank, and strict constructionists—who thought the government
2i
Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10.1
should limit its role to things specifically included in the Constitution—always opposed it. The bank was also seen by many as a way to expand the power of the commercial elite based in New York and Philadelphia and, thus, was seen as an enemy by farmers whether they lived on small out-of-the-way farms in the still very rural country or on the bourgeoning plantations of the cotton-growing South. In the opinion of many farmers, whether small or large scale, Jackson was the defender of their interests against threatening commercial elites. Particularly since the Supreme Court’s ruling on McCulloch v. Maryland that Congress had the right to charter a bank if it thought it was in the national interest, popular support for the Bank had weakened (see Chapter 9). Many farmers did not believe “the national interest” that Congress saw was in their interests.
During his first months in office, Jackson did not say a lot about the bank, but in December 1829, he told Congress: “Both the constitutionality and the expediency of the law creating this bank are well questioned.... [I] t has failed in the great end of establishing a uniform and sound currency.” In spite of Jackson’s challenge, the bank’s charter ensured that it could continue for 7 more years, but Jackson had fired a warning shot. Before long, he would do much more.
Many of Jackson’s strongest supporters disagreed with him about the bank. The country was prospering, credit was solid, and the soundness of the currency, despite Jackson’s words, seemed secure. The federal bank’s policies of calling in loans may have helped start the Panic of 1819, but Nicholas Biddle, the bank’s president, had done as much as anyone in the country to end the hard times after the Panic of 1819. Nevertheless Jackson was a populist, intending to represent the common people politically. And although the nation’s elite supported the bank, many citizens did not like any banks. In a meeting at the White House he told Biddle, “I do not dislike your bank any more than all banks,” but the federal bank was the only one Jackson could do something about. His attack on the bank was as emotional as it was calculated.
For the next few years, Biddle led the bank in continued efforts to stabilize the currency, help state banks through difficult times, and expand the nation’s credit, something that both northern mill owners and western land promoters liked. The bank also concentrated wealth and power within the economy in the hands of a commercial elite and strengthened the nation’s unified market economy based on currency and trade. That uneven concentration of wealth and power was something Jackson would not forgive.
In 1832, Jackson launched his campaign for reelection. For the first time, something resembling modern political parties played a role. Under Jackson’s leadership, the Democratic-Republicans had become simply the Democrats. They easily nominated Jackson for a second term and his handpicked running mate, Secretary of State Martin Van Buren, for vice president. The opposition to Jackson, sometimes known as the National Republicans because they had supported a strong national government, now became known simply as the Whig Party. They nominated Henry Clay for president and John Sergeant of Pennsylvania as vice president. Unlike the Jacksonian Democrats, the Whig Party was committed to Alexander Hamilton’s vision of a federal government that took an active role in shaping the economy, so they strongly supported the Second Bank of the United States. The Whig nominee, Henry Clay, urged Biddle to secure the bank’s future as well as that of the pro-bank Whig Party. If Biddle were to request an extension of the bank’s charter, even though the original charter would not expire for 4 years, Clay would promise to make the bank an issue in the campaign. Either Biddle would win the recharter fight immediately, or he would provide Clay a weapon with which to attack Jackson. Biddle, who was astute at counting votes in Congress, took Clay’s advice and applied for a new charter. The charter bill passed both houses of Congress easily. But Jackson vetoed it. He told Martin Van Buren, who was now his running mate, “The bank, Mr. Van Buren, is trying to kill me, but I will kill it.”
102
103
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 281
By the time Jackson became president, political cartoons were becoming popular, including this one that shows Jackson using his order to withdraw government funds to topple the pillars of the bank as Nicholas Biddle, the bank's "devil president, and investors run.
In November 1832, Jackson defeated Clay 219 electoral votes to 49. Congress refused to override the presidents veto.
Biddle still tried to rally support in Congress. He made arguments, offered congressmen loans, and ensured that the banks lead attorney was elected to Congress from Philadelphia. When Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster complained that his annual retainer from the bank had not been “refreshed as usual,” Biddle promised quick action. Biddle also loosened credit across the country, ensuring short-term prosperity but provoking an eventual reckoning. He was desperate to save his bank.
Jackson then made his move. He ordered his treasury secretary to remove federal deposits from the bank and place them in 23 state banks that he selected—banks that were quickly called Jacksons “pet” banks by his opponents. The move was meant to destroy the Second Bank of the United States. But the law said that federal funds could be withdrawn only if there was clear evidence that the deposits were not secure. Even Jacksons handpicked auditors could find no such evidence. When Treasury Secretary McLane refused the presidents order to move the funds, Jackson promoted him to secretary of state. When another treasury secretary also refused, Jackson fired him.
Finally, Jackson’s third treasury secretary, Roger B. Taney, who also had doubts about the legality of removing federal funds, hit on a compromise. He would not actually remove federal deposits from the bank, but he would do something just as effective to undermine the bank. Going forward, Taney regularly paid the government’s bills with funds from the accounts that the government had in the Bank of the United States, but he stopped depositing new federal revenue in the bank. Instead, the government’s income went to the state banks. It was a mortal blow. The federal government’s accounts slowly shrunk to zero and the Second Bank of the United States was dead, though it took a few years to die.
Led by Clay, the Senate censured the president, saying he had “assumed upon himself authority and power not conferred by the Constitution and laws.” But the censure did not hurt Jackson or save the bank. Biddle’s politically motivated loans and payments sapped support for the bank. The Second Bank of the United States became a wholly private bank and soon went bankrupt. The combination of inflation caused by Biddle’s too-easy credit and the loss of a national bank that could stabilize the currency caused financial distress. By 1837—just after Jackson left office—the nation experienced another financial panic, and there was no national entity to help stabilize the economy. Nevertheless, efforts to revive the bank failed. For decades, all of the paper currency in circulation would be issued by state banks, some of less than solid credit. Only in 1863, during the Civil War, did the U.S. government again issue paper money, and not until the creation of the Federal Reserve Bank in 1913 did the nation again have a central bank to regulate the economy.
The Tariff, the Union, and the Nullification Crisis
The battle over the tariff began as a modest disagreement over federal tax policy. Before it ended, that battle was the greatest constitutional crisis the nation faced between the adoption of the Constitution in 1789 and the Civil War in 1861. To a degree, it was a personal battle between two proud and stubborn men, Andrew Jackson and John C. Calhoun. In another sense it was a battle about the fundamental nature of the U.S. government.
ANDREW JACKSON VS. JOHN C. CALHOUN
John C. Calhoun of South Carolina had been elected vice president when John Quincy Adams won the presidency in 1824, irt IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
10.1
and he was reelected to that office in 1828 to serve with Jackson. Because separate ballots were cast for presidential and vice presidential candidates after the passage of the Twelfth Amendment in 1804 and before the rise of party nominating conventions in 1832, no one thought it strange that two leaders as hostile to each other as Adams and Jackson would have the same vice president. As a congressman and as secretary of war under President James Monroe, Calhoun had been a nationalist who favored internal improvements as much as Henry Clay or John Quincy Adams. He sought a strong national government and had supported the Bank of the United States. Although his views differed from Jacksons on some issues, everyone expected Calhoun and Jackson, as proslavery southerners, to have a close partnership. It was not to be.
One of the first wedges between them was purely social. Jacksons Secretary of War John Eaton had married the recently widowed Margaret O’Neale Timberlake, but rumors swirled that she was a widow only because her first husband, a naval officer, had committed suicide when he learned of her long adulterous relationship with Eaton. Jackson, who had been deeply hurt by attacks on his own marriage, defended the Eatons. Others in Washington, led by Mrs. Calhoun, snubbed Peggy Eaton. When Emily Donelson, Jacksons official White House hostess, joined with Mrs. Calhoun, Jackson temporarily banished her from the White House. He never forgave the Calhouns.
Another reason for the growing split between Jackson and Calhoun centered on the fact that Calhoun’s political beliefs were changing. By 1828, Calhoun, who had previously advocated for a strong federal role in the life of the nation—far stronger than anything Jackson ever advocated—was becoming the nation’s strongest defender of states’ rights against federal authority. This new stance may have reflected an honest change of heart, but it also served a political purpose. Regardless, it guaranteed a clash with Jackson since no matter how much Jackson might have favored states’ rights in the past, he would not tolerate any challenge to his authority as president.
Many of the leaders in South Carolina, Calhoun’s home state, were becoming very fearful of the federal government, and South Carolina was developing the strongest anti-federal stance in the Union. The South Carolina Radicals, as they were called, dominated state government. They advocated the right of states to declare any federal law null and void or even to secede from the Union. The reason was clear: South Carolinians feared for the future of slavery more than people in any other state. Most residents of South Carolina—54 percent—were enslaved people of African descent. In some rice-growing regions of the state, that figure was closer to 90 percent. A wealthy but deeply fearful white elite governed these slaves and depended on their labor to generate continuing wealth. In 1827, a pamphlet called The Crisis; or, Essays on the Usurpations of the Federal Government argued that federal tariffs, internal improvements, and other federal activities were all means to enable the national government, if it chose, to abolish slavery. As word spread that Parliament was about to abolish slavery throughout the British Empire in the 1830s, the fear grew that Congress might try to do the same. Calhoun had to decide whether he was with his state’s planter elite or against them. He might have dreamed about becoming president someday, but in the meantime, he would have to win elections in South Carolina. He made his choice.
NULLIFICATION AND THE FUTURE OF THE REPUBLIC
In 1828, Calhoun wrote a pamphlet arguing that a state could declare a tariff or any other federal law null and void. Calhoun claimed that since state-by-state conventions had ratified the Constitution, state conventions, not the Supreme Court, had the authority to decide what was constitutional. In his view, once a state convention declared a federal law void, other states would have to weigh in, and only a new amendment to the Constitution could force the law on the dissenting state. Calhoun did not advocate secession as many of the South Carolina Radicals did. Instead, he hoped nullification in response to a tariff or to restrictions on slavery would make secession unnecessary. He was thus more moderate than many South Carolinians, but that moderation would not continue to be the case. J 10.2
I
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 283
L
10.1
io j j
10.? 5
Tariff of Abominations
A revised federal tariff (or tax on imports) that lowered the tax on cotton products but raised it on many of the products made in the mid-Atlantic states.
The tariff, not the issue of slavery, brought the issue of nullification to the fore. The tariff, or tax on imported goods, had been the major source of financial support since the Washington administration, and it had been an issue in the 1828 election in which Jackson defeated Adams. As Jacksons supporters prepared for that election, Jackson’s chief advisor Martin Van Buren realized that, even though he and Jackson opposed a high tariff—in part, because they thought the federal government needed less money and, in part, because the tax raised the cost of foreign-made consumer products in the United States—the Adams-Clay tariff was popular in many parts of the country because it protected local industries from foreign competition and because many people liked the internal improvements like roads and canals that the tariff helped finance. Adams and Clay might want to fight the 1828 election on the issue of tariffs, but Van Buren did not. When the Adams administration suggested a new tariff, Van Buren and his congressional allies decided to reshape it rather than oppose it. They knew they could not win New England in the next election, so they did not hesitate to modify the proposed tariff by reducing the protection for the cotton produced by New England mill owners, thus allowing foreign-made cotton to be sold more cheaply than might otherwise have been the case. They also raised tariffs to protect export of products like molasses, hemp, iron, and wool, which were produced in the mid-Atlantic states, especially in Pennsylvania, to woo voters there by protecting their industries and jobs from foreign competition. The result was a tariff that raised the price of products that many Americans bought from foreign sources and that angered the cotton mill owners who originally wanted the tariff but now saw the protection of their industry disappear. The new tariff also infuriated rural interests, especially southern plantation owners, who saw the cost of everything they needed go up while no protection was provided to the price of the goods they produced and sold on the international market. The 1828 tariff came to be known as the Tariff of Abominations because it was so uneven and obviously unfair in the industries and regions it protected, but it passed Congress and set the stage for a confusing presidential campaign and the crisis that followed.
Planters in South Carolina saw the tariff as a terrible hardship and an unfair use of federal power. To a degree, they were right. A tax on imports raised the cost of virtually everything the planters needed. Planters claimed that 40 out of every 100 bales of cotton they produced went to pay the tariff. This claim was an exaggeration, but the tariff may have raised the cost of living in South Carolina by 20 percent. In addition, planters worried that a tariff on imported goods might cause other nations to purchase less cotton either in retaliation or because, with Americans buying less from abroad, other nations might not have had the funds to purchase American grown cotton. With their state’s economy hurting, public opinion in South Carolina supported nullification of the tariff.
The issue of states’ rights versus the rights of the federal government was argued on the floor of the U.S. Senate in January 1830. It was a debate that would be remembered for generations. South Carolina Senator Robert Y. Hayne, a protege of Calhoun’s, claimed that the federal government was making the North the winner and the South the loser and that the pro-Northern policy has invaded the State of South Carolina, is making war upon her citizens, and endeavoring to overthrow her principles and institutions.” Everyone understood that Hayne was talking about the tariff but also the issue of slavery. He was determined to defend the right of South Carolina to nullify federal law and, if still dissatisfied, to secede from the Union if Congress ever made a move against slavery. Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster’s “Second Reply to Hayne” staked out a different position. Webster pleaded for a strong federal union that no state should be allowed to undermine. His closing line, “Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable” became part of American lore. Hayne congratulated Webster on winning the war of words, though Hayne never changed his mind.
14 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
In January 1830 as tensions were building over the right claimed by South Carolina to nullify federal law, Massachusetts Senator Daniel Webster-shown here—defended the priority of the federal government and the cause of the national union.
At first, people wondered how the president would respond to the debate. Jackson had campaigned for reducing the federal role in people’s lives, but he did not like to be crossed. He was not elected to see the government over which he presided pushed aside. As a military man, he would not countenance mutiny. As a politician, he despised Calhoun s self-serving strategic maneuvering. To the surprise of some, Jackson, the president elected with virtually no support from New England, embraced Webster’s speech in spite of the fact that it was given by the senator from Massachusetts.
Four months after the Hayne-Webster debate, political leaders were asked to make toasts at a banquet. Looking directly at his vice president, Jackson, offered a simple toast, “Our Union: It must be preserved.” Calhoun responded, “The Union. Next to our liberty, the most dear. May we always remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states....” It marked the final break between the two men.
Nevertheless, as strongly as Jackson believed in asserting federal authority, he was still prepared to compromise about the tariff itself.
The actual rate charged in the tariff mattered far less to Jackson than the principle that no state had a right to nullify federal law. A compromise seemed possible when Congress convened in 1831. Former President John Quincy Adams had been elected to the House of Representatives from Massachusetts (the only former president in history to return to Congress), and the congressional leaders asked him to write a new tariff to replace the Tariff of Abominations.
Adams took the job seriously. He reduced the duty on goods not
produced in the United States and therefore not in need of protection, but retained tariffs to protect growing U.S. industries, especially iron and cotton textiles. He also reduced the tariff on cheap woolens—which slaves wore—from 45 percent to 5 percent, a significant concession to the slave states.
Most of the South found Adams’s tariff reasonable. Besides, much of the cottongrowing South was prospering, despite the tariff, because of other Jacksonian policies, especially from the new land that Indian Removal had made available for growing cotton. Other states were in no mood to press the nullification issue.
But South Carolina was different. Much of the state’s farmland had been exhausted by decades of overuse, and its dependency on slave labor made its leaders more fearful of federal intervention in the institution of slavery than those of any other state. Led by Calhoun, the state’s leaders believed that they had to win the right to nullify the tariff to establish the larger principal that states could nullify any law. For them, the Adams tariff was not enough. In November 1832, a South Carolina state convention declared that both the tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional and that “it shall not be lawful.. .to enforce payment of duties imposed by the said acts within the limits of this state” after February 1833. They also said that the state would secede if the federal government tried to force it to back down. The South Carolina legislature elected Robert Hayne, who had debated with Webster, as the governor to lead the state through these difficult times and elected Calhoun to replace Hayne in the Senate. Calhoun would essentially be South Carolina’s ambassador to the federal government for the next 2 decades. Calhoun resigned as vice president in December 1832, a little more than 2 months before his term ended, and returned to the Senate as a member, a very belligerent member. The stage was set for a major confrontation.
In November 1832, the South Carolina legislature also raised a state militia of25,000 volunteers. Jackson responded with a proclamation, stating that the state’s vote was “in direct violation of their duty as citizens of the United States.” According to Jackson, they had no right to nullify federal law and certainly not to raise their own army and,
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 285
he said, “Disunion by armed force is treason.” He told a South Carolina congressman, “I will hang the first man of them I can get my hands on to the first tree I can find.” He backed his words with action, reinforcing federal garrisons and sending armed revenue ships to Charleston Harbor. He also shifted the collection of customs duties in Charleston to warships offshore. When Governor Hayne told Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri that he did not think Jackson would really hang anyone, Benton, who knew Jackson better, replied, “I tell you, Hayne, when Jackson begins to talk about hanging, they can begin to look out for ropes!” Jackson also lobbied to ensure no other southern state supported South Carolina and pushed Congress to keep the tariffs low.
In the end, no shots were fired. On March 1, 1833, Congress passed a compromise tariff that Henry Clay had crafted based on Adams’s proposals and gave the president the authority to put down the rebellion. Wiser heads in South Carolina decided to compromise. The state convention reconvened and declared victory based on the new Clay tariff. For spite they also nullified the congressional vote of new military authority, which they called the “Force Bill,” but that action was now meaningless since South Carolina was no longer resisting federal authority.
Jackson won the nullification battle, but it was an incomplete victory. He made it clear, in words and actions, which Abraham Lincoln would use as precedent, that no state could nullify federal law and that the U.S. government would use force to assert its authority. He was treated as a hero in many parts of the country and even
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Nullification Crisis
The 1832 South Carolina convention that passed the Ordinance of Nullification said:
Whereas the Congress of the United States, by various acts, purporting to be acts laying duties and imposts [taxes] on foreign imports, but in reality intended for the protection of domestic manufacturers, and giving the bounties to classes and individuals engaged in particular employments, at the expense and to the injury and oppression of other classes and individuals...hath exceeded it just powers under the Constitution...
We, therefore, the people of the State of South Carolina in Convention assembled, do declare and ordain...That the several acts and parts of acts of the Congress of the United States, purporting to be laws for the imposing of duties and imposts on the importation of foreign commodities...are unauthorized by the Constitution of the United States, and violate the true meaning and intent thereof, and are null, void, and no law, nor binding upon this state, its officers or citizens.
This declaration was not the first time in U.S. history that a state had taken such a stand. The Kentucky and Virginia resolves
of 1798 and 1799, written by Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, had said the same thing about the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Hartford Convention that met in 1814 said the much the same thing about Congress having declared war on Great Britain in 1812. Yet unlike the response to earlier challenges, President Jackson declared the South Carolina ordinance "incompatible with the existence of the Union" and prepared for a military response.
Source: Statues at Large of South Carolina, Vol. I, pp. 329ff. (Columbia, South Carolina: A. S. Johnston, 1836).
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
Why did the authors of the Ordinance of Nullification believe that the Tariffs of 1828 and 1832 were unconstitutional?
2.	Craft an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: "As the Nullification Crisis demonstrates, the ratification of the Constitution in 1788 was only a first, tentative step towards defining the relationship between the federal government and the states.” What events and developments between 1788 and 1832 support your position?
I6
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848 given an honorary degree by Harvard University. Even so, neither Calhoun nor the South Carolina legislature admitted defeat. In fact, that legislature passed a new law in 1834 requiring anyone holding state office to swear primary loyalty to South Carolina and only conditional loyalty to the federal government. This law effectively barred Unionists, those moderates who disagreed with nullification, perhaps a third of the state’s voters, from state office for the next 30 years.
Alexis de Tocqueville was in the United States during the Nullification Crisis. He took a dim view of the compromise on the tariff and the decision of South Carolina to nullify the “Force Bill”:
Either I am mistaken or the federal government of the Unites States is daily losing its power; it is gradually withdrawing from public affairs and is increasingly narrowing its sphere of action... .1 think I have seen a more lively feeling of independence and a more evident affection for regional government developing in the individual states of the Union.
The outcome of this movement, Tocqueville said, was “hidden in the future and I do not claim the ability to lift the veil.” But he remained worried for the future of the country.
10J
10.2
10 J
10.1
Quick Review Was Andrew Jackson's presidency democratic? Which of his actions and policies support your argument?
DEMOCRATIZED RELIGION: THE SECOND GREAT AWAKENING
Analyze the diversity of American religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
10.2
Most Americans had strong opinions about Andrew Jackson. They might love or hate him, but they followed his career. However, politics was far from the only interest of most people. Many things closer to home, and sometimes closer to their own souls, mattered more. For many Americans in the 1820s and 1830s, the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens was far more important than Presidents Jacksons policies or opinions.
No popular movement was more powerful than the upsurge in religious activity that took place in Jacksonian America. Once again de Tocqueville understood the country well: “There is no country in the whole world in which the Christian religion retains a greater influence over the souls of men than in America.” He described the Christianity he saw as “a democratic and republican religion.” When de Tocqueville wrote these words in the early 1830s, the Second Great Awakening was in full swing. It had begun around 1800 (see Chapter 8), but gathered new strength in Jacksonian America. Contrary to what Tocqueville implied, not all Americans were Protestant Christians, and many of those who were Christians did not fit into traditional Protestantism. But for a large numbekof those who lived from the 1820s to the 1840s, religion was important, even if formal membership in a specific religious congregation was not.
Charles G. Finney and New York's "Burner-Over District"
In 1821, Charles Grandison Finney, a 29-year-old lawyer in Adams, New York, not far from the Erie Canal, was struggling with the question of whether true religious belief was consistent with his legal career. He decided to leave his law practice, and began to preach in churches in upstate New York, eventually becoming one of thejnost influential preachers in the United States.
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 287
103 ;
In July 1824, Finney was ordained a Presbyterian minister in spite of his lack of formal training. In 1826, the spirit of revivalism hit upstate New York, and in 1830, Finney led the largest religious revival ever seen in Rochester, New York. Six hundred people joined one of the town’s three Presbyterian Churches, and the other denominations were also strengthened.
Finney did not seek an emotional catharsis from his congregants but, like an attorney, argued his case logically using wit and wisdom. Nevertheless, in his preaching, the rigid religious orthodoxy that dominated Congregational and Presbyterian churches gave way to a more egalitarian spirit. Finney called people to change their lives, not necessarily to agreement with specific creeds. Because of his preaching, hundreds, then thousands took religion more seriously, joined churches, participated in reform movements, and changed New York and American society.
By the late 1830s, the area along the Erie Canal where Finney preached had become known as “the burned-over district” because of the fires of religious enthusiasm that rolled over the region. Finney was far from the only revivalist in New York. However, he gave the New York revivals a distinct tone—different not only from the emotionalism of frontier revivals but also from the staid life of many established churches. Ihe Erie Canal also made communications easier and faster than before, so word of the revivals traveled fast.
Lyman Beecher and the Growth of Voluntary Societies
As a young minister, Lyman Beecher had been one of the staunchest defenders of state support for the Congregational churches in Connecticut (see Chapter 8). Once the Connecticut churches lost their government support, Beecher embraced the new situation and supported revivals and voluntary associations for moral reform in New England and the nation. Beecher described his goal:
A
Bible for every family, a school for every district, and a pastor for every 1000 souls, must be the motto upon the standard, round which the millions who enjoy these blessings must rally for the purpose of extending them to those who do not. Lyman Beecher, one of the leaders of the Second Great Awakening, is shown here with his numerous children including petitioner and educator Catharine (to the left of her father), Harriet Beecher Stowe (far right), and one of the most famous ministers of the next generation, Henry Ward Beecher (standing on the right).
288 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848

As the Second Great Awakening grew in force in the 1820s and 1830s, a series of voluntary societies or interdenominational organizations that Beecher helped launch grew in their influence. These societies were not owned by any one religious body but, rather, depended on the voluntary contributions of members of several different religious bodies. They represented a new form of cooperation across traditional religious lines in the service of a larger goal to change the culture of the United States. The American Bible Society distributed Bibles, the American Sunday School Union provided curriculum materials for church-based Sunday schools, and the American Education Society supported the education of ministers. In addition, the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions sent missionaries around the world, including Adoniram Judson and his wife Ann Hasseltine Judson, whose efforts in Burma became role models for generations of foreign missionaries to convert the world to Christianity. Beecher included prominent members of the Congregational, Presbyterian, and Episcopal churches in the leadership of these societies. The underlying mission of all of these societies was moral reform—the creation of a sober, God-fearing, American public.
By the early 1830s, Beecher had become convinced that the key to transforming the nation lay in the Mississippi Valley. He became president of Lane Theological Seminary in Cincinnati to
fulfill this goal. Beecher helped prepare future ministers, strengthened religious colleges, and placed Protestant pastors in hundreds of Midwestern churches. He also helped create the public school system of Ohio and supported schools and teachers across the Midwest.
The goal of all of this activity was to strengthen the moral sway of Congregational-Presbyterian Protestantism against the individualism of Jacksonian Democrats, Catholics, and other Protestants who disagreed with them. In the world that Beecher and his fellow Protestant evangelists were creating, the separating of church and state meant that specific denominations would not wield political power, but together, these Protestants would help build a culture in which the churches, voluntary societies, and public schools would reinforce common beliefs and practices.
Revivalism and Moral Reform Movements
Most converts in the revivals that preachers like Finney and Beecher led, perhaps three-fourths of them, were women who then prayed and lobbied for their husbands and families to convert. Finney and his closest lieutenant, Theodore Dwight Weld, encouraged women to be active in their religious communities. Where New England churches had urged women to keep silent except at home, the new generation of revivalists welcomed them as prayer leaders and preachers. Such speaking in “promiscuous assemblies,” may have been familiar in Baptist and even Methodist churches, but it was new in the more middle-class Presbyterian and Congregational churches. Women who became religious leaders in the revivals often also became leaders in their communities. The movement demanding womens rights that swept the United States in the 1840s sprang from the same areas of upstate New York that revivalists called the burned-over district (see Chapter 12). The link was not surprising.
For Finney, conversion meant that one needed to show one’s new faith in ethical behavior, and no ethical behavior was more important to him than opposing slavery. Upstate New York’s churches sent revivalist preachers into the rest of the country to preach for the abolition of slavery. For the next 30 years, the Finney-Weld brand of revivalism spread across the country and was one of the streams of abolitionism that inspired Northerners to fight a war to end slavery.
The rights of women and opposition to slavery were not the only reform causes to spring from the revivalism of the Second Great Awakening. Other reformers, inspired by the same forces, began to advocate for important changes in the way prisoners were treated. Too often, they said, overcrowded prisons were simply schools for crime, and the focus on punishment, whatever the original crime, did little to redeem or reclaim prisoners to reenter society. At first, reformers advocated the building of prisons in which each prisoner would be confined to a solitary cell where they would have time to reflect on their past, be taught new habits, and prepare to reenter society. But too often, the solitary confinement led to insanity rather than reform. In response, prison reformers built a new kind of prison in which each prisoner had a separate cell, but also had access to common dining quarters, workshops, and a chapel. In all of these spaces, the authorities sought to teach prisoners a new way of behaving as preparation for reclaiming them. In the 1830s, the New York state penitentiary at Auburn was redesigned to foster the new approach, and soon thereafter, a large new penitentiary at Sing Sing on the Hudson River was built with 1,000 cells plus the common areas. Reformers hoped that the new, more humane approach would change lives and ultimately society. Other states quickly followed in adopting the new models.
Many mentally ill people were treated very much like prisoners before the reforms, and they often found themselves in similar circumstances. Reformers quickly took up the cause of those they said were insane. Perhaps no one equaled Dorothea Dix as a reformer in the treatment of the mentally ill. In 1843, Dix told the Massachusetts fegislature that she was calling their attention “to the present state of Insane Persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience!” Moreover, she had the facts to
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 289
This illustration from an anti-alcohol publication makes the claim that drunkenness was the cause of many problems in society, especially the abuse of women.
prove her point. The result, beginning in Massachusetts, was that a system of state hospitals for the insane replaced the earlier prisons.
Many other reforms also blossomed. Although the campaign against alcohol would reach its peek many decades later, it began during the Second Great Awakening. Lyman Beecher preached temperance sermons that were widely reprinted, including one in which he said, “What then is this universal, natural, and national remedy for intemperance? It is the banishment of ardent spirits from the list of lawful objects of commerce...” Many, including members of Congress took the pledge to stop drinking, the U.S. Army stopped the old tradition of a ration of alcohol, and refusing to drink became a mark of religious observance in many circles. At the same time, the American Peace Society advocated an end to all wars. The American Sunday School Union distributed not only Bible stories, but also basic reading books in places where there were no schools. Schools were opened for those who were deaf and blind. Efforts were made to rescue prostitutes. Countless reforms designed to create a better, more humane, and sometimes more tightly controlled society emerged from the enthusiasm of the awakening.
Utopian Religious Communities
The religious enthusiasm of the early 1800s also inspired untraditional ways of thinking about religious matters. Large American spaces that allowed people to develop their own communities relatively undisturbed and the American emphasis on liberty, even the liberty to be eccentric, made the United States fertile ground for radical experiments and utopian religious communities. Some of these religious experiments were short lived. Others lasted for generations. A few, most of all the Mormons, have continued to the present.
MOTHER ANN LEE AND THE SHAKERS
The founder of the United Society of Believers in Christ’s Second Appearing, or the Shakers, was Ann Lee—known as Mother Ann Lee—who before the American Revolution gathered a few supporters in England and came to America in 1774. Lee was convinced that she was receivings special revelation from God that human sexuality was the basis of all sin and celibacy was the only way to live a godly life. Lee inspired Shaker communities in New York and New England. Shaker worship reflected Lee’s spirituality and, according to observers, included, “shaking and singing, hopping and turning, smoking and running, groaning and laughing-Shaker communities at New Lebanon, New Hampshire; Sabbath Day Lake, Maine; and elsewhere thrived, and the Shakers became one of the largest and most successful of the pre-Civil communitarian movements.
290 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
SBlSglMKBiiaMSiBB
In Shaker worship and community life, women and men were kept separate, but all participated in lively music and dance designed to shake sin out of their bodies.
Shaker theology placed Ann Lee on a par with Jesus and committed the society to the equal leadership of women with men. But Shakers were united by their community life more than by theology. They demanded celibacy, a requirement that limited the community’s appeal and prevented increasing membership by means of childbirth. Instead, all new members had to be converts who were attracted to Shaker life. The revivals produced many such converts who sought a deeper spiritual life than they found in traditional churches. Shaker beliefs were reflected in their commitment to making things of beauty, and Shaker furniture remains a reminder of their beliefs.
American Voices
The Shaker Community, “Tis the Gift to be Simple,” 1830s
rhe simplicity and joyfulness of the Shakers have infiltrated American culture in many ways. Shaker furniture, now so popular, was not just a product for them. Mildred Barker, leader of a Shaker Community in Maine, who died in 1990, once reflected, "I almost expect to be remembered as a chair or a table." But Barker reminded those who came to interview her that behind oil of the Shakers' physical artifacts, "There's the religion." And while many of their complex theological ideas have largely been forgotten, the basic joy, humility, and playfulness of the Shakers continue to be remembered in this familiar hymn that dates to the 1830s:
Tis the gift to be simple, 'tis the gift to be free;
Tis the gift to come down where we ought to be;
And when we find ourselves in the place just right,
Twill be in the valley of love and delight.
When true simplicity is gaind,
To bow and to bend we shan't be asham'd To turn, turn will be our delight,
'Till by turning, turning we come round right.
Source: Stephen J. Stein, The Shaker Experience in America (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), p. 191.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What values and priorities are extolled in the hymn?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Why might simplicity, certainty, and humility have been particularly appealing to 1830s Americans? What aspects of the larger society might Shakers have found most disturbing and unwelcome?
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 291
10.2
The things they created, whether furniture, houses, or art, were owned in common, not individually, a requirement that some found as difficult to accept as celibacy.
JOHN HUMPHREY NOYES AND THE ONEIDA COMMUNITY
The Oneida Community also had its roots in the Second Great Awakening and flourished in Oneida, New York, between 1848 and 1879. Its founder and spiritual guide was John Humphrey Noyes, who was born in Vermont in 1811. As a student for the ministry, he became convinced that repentance from sin was not enough and that people should simply stop sinning. Noyes became convinced that all Christians could achieve a state “in which all the affections of the heart are given to God, and in which there is no sin.” Gathering a small community in Putney, Vermont, he expanded his definition of Christian perfectionism to include what he called “complex marriage,” an arrangement in which monogamy was replaced with many sexual companions. Noyes argued that sexual pleasure was a gift from God and that Christianity demanded the sharing of that gift without any exclusive or jealous reservations.
Vermont authorities, however, took a dim view of these sexual practices and beliefs, and Noyes and his followers moved to Oneida, New York, where the community thrived for decades, supported ultimately by producing and selling silverware. Oneida eventually fell victim to Victorian morality and to its dependence on Noyes as its single charismatic leader. Between 1875 and 1879, Oneida was torn by debates as New York authorities began threatening arrests for Oneida’s flouting of the marriage laws. Noyes fled to Canada and the community dissolved although the silver business supported former members for generations.
ROBERT OWEN AND THE NEW HARMONY COMMUNITY
After making a fortune in London, Robert Owen founded a model factory town at New Lanark, Scotland, in which he sought to put the spirit of universal welfare into practice. In the early 1820s, Owen decided to relocate his utopian vision of a community designed to benefit all of it members and establish it in the United States. In early 1825, 900 people arrived at New Harmony, Indiana, where Owen had purchased land. But New Harmony failed within a year. The community could not attract enough skilled workers to make it economically successful. There was tension between those who ran New Harmony and the rest of the community. As one disaffected resident recalled, the “aristocrats” quarreled, and the fields went to ruin. Owen lost most of his fortune, which he had invested in New Harmony, but returned to England to continue to advocate his version of social reform.
f
JOSEPH SMITH AND THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS
Joseph Smith (1805-1844) was as much a product of New York’s burned-over district as Charles G. Finney. Smith was born in 1805 and moved with his family to a farm in Palmyra, New York, when he was age 11. In 1827, word spread along the Erie Canal that Smith had found a treasure that would unlock the Indian history of the area. He had, he said, found golden plates and magical stones known as Urim and Thummim with which to read and translate what was written on the plates by an ancient prophet-historian named Mormon. He published the result, the Book of Mormon, in 1830. With that book, a uniquely American religious tradition was born, one that its followers believed represented a rebirth of true Christianity. Smith, however, did much more than publish a new book; he organized a community. Within a month of the book’s publication, the first Mormon community began to form near Palmyra, New York, with Smith as its leader. Some responded with hos-
• tility to his efforts, even tarring and feathering Smith at one point. But converts seeking religious truth poured in, a temple was built, and the community grew.
In response to the hostility, Smith and the Mormon community moved first to Missouri and then in the late 1830s, to Nauvoo, Illinois, which became the largest and fastest growing city in Illinois because of Mormonism. The city’s 15,000 residents
Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
became a virtually autonomous state, and their militia was recognized by state law. But Smith s political involvements and religious teaching, especially his suggestion that all members participate in marriages involving one husband and multiple wives, brought renewed hostility. On June 27, 1844, a mob killed Smith and his brother Hyrum.
With Smith’s death, Brigham Young became the new leader of the Mormons in 1847 and led them on a cross-continent trek to the shores of the Great Salt Lake in what is now Utah. Salt Lake was then on the northern edge of the Republic of Mexico, which was soon to be annexed by the United States. There, far from any governmental authority, they set up settlements in a tight, church-regulated community. They also embraced Smith s revelation that a man could take as many wives as he could support.
But the Treaty of Guadalupe Hildago, which marked the end of the U.S. War with Mexico from 1846 to 1848, brought Salt Lake City and the Mormon community under the control of the U.S. government. For a while, the U.S. government left the Mormons alone, but in 1857, President James Buchanan replaced Young with a non-Mormon territorial governor, and the Mormon War broke out as federal authorities tried to enforce monogamy on the Mormons and the Mormons fought back. In one well-publicized incident, Mormons massacred a group of non-Mormon settlers. Only in 1890, after an intense time of prayer and a new revelation, did the Mormon leadership abandon plural marriage. Relations with the government improved, and Utah became a state in 1896. Of all the new religious communities spawned during the Second Great Awakening, the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day Saints has been the most successful.
Mormons, like those shown in this wagon train, crossed the plains and mountains to get to new homes in Utah.
Transcendentalism
In 1838, far from Salt Lake City or the revivals of New York, Ralph Waldo Emerson gave a speech at Harvard Divinity School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, that had as much impact as any revival sermon. Emerson had been ordained as a Unitarian minister but had resigned when he came to believe that the Lord’s Supper and public prayer were barriers to direct experience of the divine.
In the Divinity School Address, Emerson told an audience of future Unitarian ministers that too often in formal worship, “The soul is not preached.” And he said, “The true preacher can be known by this, that he deals out to the people his life,—life passed through the fire of thought.” Emerson’s call to preach “throbs of desire and hope” rather than formal theology offended most of his audience and he was never invited back to the Divinity School, but the speech represented a new approach to religious life that was developing in America in the 1830s.
While Emerson continued to develop his ideas for another 40 years, the Transcendentalist movement with which he is most associated blossomed in the 1830s. In 1836, a group that came to call themselves the Transcendental Club met at the Boston home of George Ripley, another Unitarian minister, to discuss ideas. The members of the club created a theology that reflected a powerful personal experience of life.
In 1841, under Ripley’s leadership, members of the Transcendental Club founded Brook Farm, a utopian community in West Roxbury, Massachusetts, where the residents sought to support themselves through manual labor. Women and men shared work equally, and an effort was made at true gender equity. But few of the residents of Brook Farm actually knew much about farming, the farm did not prosper, and the community disbanded in 1847. Nevertheless, Emerson’s writings and the Transcendental movement he helped launch reflected an impatience with “old ways” and a desire for direct and immediate experience of the divine that continued to impact American religious life.
10.2
Quick Review How did the increasing diversity of religion in America reflect other political and social changes in the nation?
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson 293
DEMOCRATIZED EDUCATION: THE BIRTH OF THE
COMMON SCHOOL
_________________ Explain thG dGVGloprnent of public education as a result of, and in response to, the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s.
103
The years during which Andrew Jackson dominated American politics were also years in which the nations public school system was radically transformed, though the transformation was mostly the work of Jacksons staunch opponents. Many of the most prominent education reformers were Whigs who did not share Jackson’s vision for American society. They often sought to change the ways schools were organized and conducted for the same reasons they opposed Jackson politically. Schools, Whig educators believed, could build a new American culture more to their liking than the Jacksonian brand of democracy that most school reformers found too individualistic and unlikely to transmit the kind of moral code they thought was essential to a well-regulated national life.
Various individuals with their own agendas contributed to what came to be known as the Common School Crusade. Catherine Beecher sought to empower women by opening the doors for them to become school teachers. Horace Mann, a Whig Party leader, helped launch a new and more tightly organized school system in Massachusetts—a system that came to serve as a model for much of the nation. Ihe transformation of the nation’s schools in this period was a key dynamic of the changing culture of the United States between the 1820s and the 1840s.
Women Become Teachers
In 1835, Catharine Beecher, daughter of the religious leader Lyman Beecher, was already well known for founding the Hartford Female Seminary to help educate women and for her petitions seeking to stop Jackson’s Indian Removal. In her Essay on the Education of Female Teachers published in that year, Beecher argued that women were much better equipped than men to be teachers, but she also wanted to educate them for the work. She saw teaching as an extension of motherhood, a nurturing role: “What is the most important and peculiar duty of the female sex? It is the physical,
, n' "I0 u Very y°un9 women' taught school, most often in one-room schools like this one where ch' dren of 311 ages learned to read, write, count, and then advance through more complex assignments. No all the schools were as comfortable as the one shown here and not all the children were as well behaved.

Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
intellectual, and moral education of children. She continued, “Woman, whatever are
her relations in life, is necessarily the guardian of the nursery, the companion of child-
hood, and the constant model of imitation. It is her hand that first stamps impressions
on the immortal spirit, that must remain forever.” At a time when most teachers were
still men, Beecher argued not only that women actually made better teachers than
men, but also that including women as teachers would expand the supply of teachers
for the country and open the door to a professional life for middle-class women who
had few employment options.
Beecher’s impassioned views reflected those of Emma Willard, who had founded the Troy Female Seminary in 1821 in upstate New York to prepare women to be teachers. Like Beecher, Willard had argued, “There are many females of ability, to whom the business of instructing children is highly acceptable.” She also believed that women should get the same education as men and modeled the curriculum at Troy on what men studied at college, though she added courses on how to teach. In 1837,
Mary Lyon founded Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in Massachusetts to give future female teachers a college education.
New Structures for Schooling
While Catharine Beecher and her colleagues were transforming the gender of the
teaching profession, other reformers sought to transform the structure of schools.
None of these leaders was more important than Horace Mann. In 1836, Mann, a
rising star in the Massachusetts Whig Party, helped shepherd a bill through the
Massachusetts legislature that created a state Board of Education. He then became
the boards full-time, paid secretary. Mann spent the next 12 years advocating tighter
state standards for education, more money for schools and teacher salaries, and a
better education for children. He became the best-known spokesperson for public
education of his generation.
Mann believed in state standards for the schools. He described the schools of Massachusetts as, “so many distinct, independent communities.” Mann meant to change that. He also believed that it was the responsibility of all citizens to pay taxes to support schools; looking at the conditions of the state’s schools when he took office, he did not think that they paid nearly enough at the time in such taxes. Like Beecher and Willard, Mann wanted educated teachers and created a system of state-sponsored teacher preparation schools, called “normal schools,” that offered 1 year of state-funded preparation to any young woman or man who wanted to be a teacher. Mann’s greatest concern, however, was the moral education of the state’s citizens. He believed that there needed to be a public guardian of morality, and since the United States had no state church, that guardian had to be the public school.
While Mann was the best-known educational reformer, almost all Whigs also came to advocate the same changes he did: state systems of education, state support for teacher preparation, and state efforts to ensure a common morality. Like many reformers, Mann and his allies could not understand why anyone would oppose them.
Yet even in Massachusetts, there was opposition. Jacksonian Democrats in the legislature tried to abolish the Board of Education and the office of secretary. They saw the state control that Mann advocated as expensive, unnecessary, and an unwarranted interference by the state in local affairs, which would undermine local support for each town’s school.
Roman Catholics were especially unhappy with the growing influence and cost of the public school system. Catholics saw the public schools as essentially a Protestant venture, something Protestants like Mann could never understand. Mann advocated teaching the Protestant Bible in school “without note or comment,” leaving it to churches or parents to interpret it. But Catholics believed that the Bible should be read in light of the teachings of the Church and not left to individual interpretation.
Chapter 10 Democracy
in the Age of Andrew Jackson 295
10.3
They found anti-Catholic bias in many of the textbooks the public schools used To pay taxes only to have their children read such material outraged them. Citing examples from textbooks that spoke of “deceitful Catholics,” Catholics in New York City wrote that they could not “in conscience, and consistently with their sense of duty to God, and to their offspring” send them to the city’s public schools and requested public funds so that they could operate their own schools. When such funds were denied Catholics in New York and around the country started their own parochial system at their own expense.
The Nation's Textbook: McGuffey's Reader
claws
catch
harks
scratch
J {
L
The j ler. ; p teeth: : she will: she will i
In 1836, the small Cincinnati publishing house of Truman and Smith brought out a new textbook for schools. The first McGuffeys Reader became part of a series, the McGuffey's Primer, McGuffey's Speller, and the First through the Sixth McGuffey's Eclectic Readers. By 1920, when most school districts had turned to other materials, 122 million copies of the books had been sold.
The McGuffey Reader offered lessons in reading and public speaking designed to create a unified, literate, and patriotic society. The Readers reflected the same morality that Mann and Beecher wanted the schools to teach. They included patriotic speeches by Patrick Henry and stories of George Washington as well as tales of the poor boy and his faithful dog or the poor boy who worked hard and made good. The texts also included ethical instruction, for example, don’t steal apples from someone else’stree, and instruction in how to speak and present oneself. The goal was a citizenry that could speak well, participate in a common democratic dialogue, and use a common national language instead of regional dialects.
A story in the Second Eclectic Reader is illustrative of the McGuffey approach. “Henry, the Bootblack,” begins with the story of Henry, “a kind good boy.”
Henry’s “father was dead, and his mother was very poor. He had a little sister about two years old.” One day, Henry found a pocketbook. He could have kept all the money in it, but he found the owner and returned it. The owner then gave him a dollar for doing so. Henry used the dollar to set himself up as a bootblack and he was “so polite that gentlemen soon began to notice him, and to let him black their boots.” When Henry brought home his first fifty cents in earnings his mother responded, “You are a dear, good boy, Henry. I did not know how I could earn enough to buy bread with, but now I think we can manage to get along quite well.” This account is not the kind of success story that would appear fifty years later. In the story, Henry does not go on to own a factory or make a fortune. He is simply a dutiful child who makes his mother happy. The students who read the McGuffey texts were urged to do the same. They were also urged to learn the correct pronunciation and spelling for support, boots, notice, money, and other words in the story. McGuffey was teaching a common morality but also a common American English to all students.
The United States that the Readers portrayed was white, middle class, hard working, and willing to sacrifice for the common good. The Readers also demanded a high standard of reading ability and moved students step by step to attain it. In one-room schoolhouses, often staffed by teachers with little training, which was the national norm throughout the 1800s, a teacher could encourage different stu dents to move from Reader to Reader in careful order and be confident that, by the time the student had mastered the Sixth Eclectic Reader, he or she would be fluent in the English language and in the nation s

( »
OF THE ECLECTIC HEHEIS.
See how this dog stands on his feet. He Wants to play with John.
A dog has four feet. A dog and a cat can see in the dark.
Hogs keep watch at night and hark, lliey bark most when the moon shines.
A dog will chase a sheep, or a hog, or a co5V? an(j bjte it. If you are kind to dog, he will not bite you.
ike	Riders were filled with patriotic speeches and stories
Ictr,.e. °ne S °Wr> here, designed to teach morality, in addition to istruction on	,
^-ummon ways of pronouncing key terms.
296 Part IV
Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
ethical norms. Not everyone agreed with the specific values the Readers taught, and reformers were often tone-deaf to complaints, but the public schools and their teachers shaped American culture as significantly as any of the religious, political, or commercial ventures of the Age of Jackson.
Quick Review Why might education be increasingly important in an expanding country?
CONCLUSION
Andrew Jackson was like no other president before him. He had no connection to the Founding Fathers, either by blood, class, or any similar privilege. Jackson was determined to make the presidency the center of American government, believing that the government should be an expression of his agenda and of his party. In his two terms as president, Jackson successfully prodded Congress to bend to his will or used executive power to realize his goals, despite fierce opposition. A complex American leader with a long-standing distrust of centralized government, his views were reflected in his actions: an Indian Removal policy that forced thousands of Native Americans out of their ancestral homes in Illinois, Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida and on to new lands in present-day Oklahoma; opposition to the Second Bank of the United States because he thought the federal government should have no role in banking, issuing paper currency, or expanding credit; and the Nullification Crisis in which Jackson successfully challenged South Carolina’s efforts to declare federal law null and void in that state. Those actions would have long-lasting effects on the nation.
For many Americans in the decades between 1820 and 1850, the growth of a more popular democracy and popular social movements led by ordinary citizens were far more important than President Jackson’s policies or opinions. Along with the market revolution that was transforming the physical, commercial, and political landscapes of the United States, the Age of Jackson, as his years in the White House were called, was also a period of social and religious revival and reform. It was the peak of a long-running series of religious revivals known as the Second Great Awakening. This upsurge in religious activity resulted in greater rights for women, stronger opposition to slavery, and radical transformation of the nation’s public schools, whose teachers and moral teachings shaped American culture as significantly as any of the religious, political, or commercial ventures of the Age of Jackson.
CHI R E
Considering the political, economic, and social aspects of the "Age of Jackson," to what extent was the United States in that period different from the beginning
of the 1800s?
Chapter 10 Democracy in the Age of Andrew Jackson
Chapter 10 Chapter Review
10.1
JACKSONIAN DEMOCRACY
Analyze Jackson's advocacy for Indian Removal, his opposition to the Bank of the United States, his support for a tariff, and the impact of these policies on other Americans.
Review Questions
1.	Comparison
How did Jackson’s vision of the presidency differ from that of his predecessors?
2.	Crafting Arguments
What were Jackson’s most important political priorities? What connections can you make between his policies and his vision of the presidency?
3.	Historical Interpretation
What does the debate over Indian Removal tell you about political divisions in the United States in the 1830s? What groups were most likely to support removal? What groups were most likely to oppose it?
4.	Synthesis
In what ways was the Nullification Crisis part of a longstanding disagreement about the nature of American government that went at least as far back as the debate over ratification of the Constitution?
DEMOCRATIZED RELIGION: THE SECOND GREAT AWAKEN I NG_______________________________________________
Analyze the diversity of American religious experience and how the freedom of the era gave rise to diverse religious expressions.
Review Questions
5.	Synthesis
How did the role of religion in American society and culture change between 1800 and 1840? What explains the changes you note?
10*2
6.	Historical Interpretation
What might explain the close connection between calls for religious revival and campaigns for social reform in the 1830s and 1840s?
7.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the various utopian religious com. munities of the early 1800s. What common features die they share? What common forces might have contributes to their emergence?
DEMOCRATIZED EDUCATION: THE BIRTH OF THE COMMON SCHOOL
i 103
Explain the development of public education as a result of, in response to, the cultural currents of the 1820s and 1830s. i
Review Questions
8.	Contextualization Why did reformers like Catherine Beecher believe women had a natural aptitude for teaching? In what ways did Beecher see teaching as a natural extension of women’s role in the home?
9.	Crafting Arguments
Is it fair to describe Mann’s system of public education, as some of his opponents did, as nothing more than a vehicle for imposing mainstream Protestantism on all Americans? Why or why not?
10.	Historical Interpretation
How did textbooks in The McGuffey Reader series shape the society and culture of the United States in the first half of the 1800s?
298 Part IV Crafting a Nation, People, Land, and a National Identity, 1800-1848
1830-1853
In this painting, Emigrants at Kanesville by William Henry Jackson, a backlog of wagons waits to be ferried across the Missouri River at Council Bluffs, Iowa.
In the summer of 1845, the Democratic Review, a New York City paper edited by John L. O’Sullivan, urged the nation to annex the independent Republic of Texas: "It is time now for opposition to the annexation of Texas to cease,” Sullivan wrote. Texas was a hot topic, and many newspapers were taking the same position. But the Review claimed that including Texas in the United States was an essential part of the fulfillment of our manifest destiny to overspread the continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our yearly multiplying millions. Manifest Destiny quickly became a core American belief. It was a mindset that justified the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, the hoped-for U.S. acquisition of the Oregon Territory along with the northern half of Mexico including Texas and California, and a significant influence across the Pacific Ocean.
Manifest Destiny gave a new name to an old idea. Even before the
American Revolution and in growing numbers in the 1790s, white Americans had crossed the Allegheny Mountains in spite of government prohibitions and had established colonies in Kentucky and in the Ohio River Valley. Soon after 1800, others were crossing into Florida and Missouri, both then under Spanish control. In both cases, the settlers were confident that the American army and American government would soon follow. While the first Americans to cross into Texas spoke of loyalty to the
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the idea of Manifest Destiny and the policies of the Polk administration almost doubled the size of the United States in 12 years in spite of opposition from many people in the country.
MANIFEST DESTINY—THE IMPORTANCE OF AN IDEA_________________________________
Explain what Manifest Destiny meant and how it led the United States to involvement in Texas, California, and Oregon.
THE U.S. WAR WITH MEXICO,
1846-1848 Analyze the causes, strategies, and outcomes of the U.S. War with Mexico.
WEST TO THE PACIFIC___________________________________
Analyze the causes and outcomes of U.S. expansion in California and into the Pacific region, including establishing new relationships with Hawaii, China, and Japan.
11.1
11.2
