Chapter 15 Reconstruction 417

■i 1865 Lincoln dies, Andrew Johnson becomes
......president
j	Last battles of the Civil War in Cameron
U J
j County, Texas I
President Johnson announces plans for a	Presidential Reconstruction
!	"Juneteenth" Emancipation announced
in Texas
j	Thirteenth Amendment ratified
Ku Klux Kian formed in Tennessee
1866	Civil Rights Act passed over Johnson's veto
1867	First Congressional Reconstruction Act passed
1868	Houses pass articles of impeachment against President Andrew Johnson Andrew Johnson is acquitted by one vote in the Senate
Fourteenth Amendment ratified
1869	Ulysses S. Grant inaugurated as 18th President of the United States
1870	Fifteenth Amendment ratified
First Enforcement Act passed by Congress U.S. Department of Justice created to enforce Reconstruction laws
1871	Ku Klux Kian Act passed by Congress
U.S.
Army troops seize Louisiana statehouse, return Republican legislature 1873	Colfax, Louisiana, Massacre Supreme Court decision in the Slaughterhouse Cases limits the reach of the Fourteenth Amendment
1874	Grant orders 5,000 troops to New Orleans to return Republican governor
1875	Civil Rights Act of 1875
1876	United States v. Cruikshank
1877	Rutherford B. Hayes inaugurated as president
Slow ending of Reconstruction
After January 1863, the Emancipation Proclamation made the Union Army an army of liberation for slaves during the war itself. Many slaves did not wait for the Union army to arrive. When Joseph Davis fled the plantation that he and his brother Jefferson Davis owned at Davis Bend on the Mississippi River in 1862, slaves took over the property and began running it themselves, much to the surprise of General Grant who arrived at Davis Bend with the Union army in 1863. Even for those still in slavery throughout the war, word passed quickly. In Mississippi, while the war was still far away, one slave responded to a planter’s greeting “Howdy, Uncle” with an angry “Call me Mister.” Other slaves refused to work unless they were paid or simply left, often in search of family members, sometimes just because, for the first time in their lives, they could.
In the aftermath of the Civil War, women and men who had been considered the property of others found that they could buy property. They could refuse to work for people who only recently had coerced their labor. They could travel without the hated passes from white masters. Sometimes they were reunited with family members from whom they had long been separated. People for whom literacy had been illegal now learned to read and write. They became teachers, started their own schools, and opened colleges and universities. Slaves and free blacks who had never dreamed of voting became voters and officeholders, members of state legislatures, and members of the United States Congress. They passed laws creating a system of public education and dreamed of better days ahead. The story of the era known as Reconstruction, its high hopes and its violent and tragic ending, is the focus of this chapter.
FEDERAL RECONSTRUCTION POLICY
15.1
Radical Republicans
A shifting group of Republican congressmen, who favored abolishing slavery and advocated full rights for former slaves in the South.
Explain the political development of federal Reconstruction policy.
In December 1864, Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts thought Lincoln had agreed that former Confederate states must grant all citizens the same right to vote as whites (which meant the right of males to vote) to be readmitted to the Union. But while Lincoln had come to believe that blacks who fought in the Union army had won the right to vote, he also believed that the Constitution gave states the right to determine who voted and he did not yet seem ready, as far as anyone knew, to interfere.
When Lincoln died in April 1865, his own party was divided on the question of the vote for African-Americans and on how best to handle the readmission of the Confederate states within the nation. With the war just ending, the majority of Republicans, in and out of Congress, were still moderates. Many had begun the Civil War with the intention only to save the Union and had been won over in the course of the war to believing that the end of the war had to mean the end of slavery. Still, that revised intention was just a single goal; they were not committed to voting rights or the award of land for newly freed African-Americans. Other Republicans who were coming to be known as Radical Republicans—often called simply “the radicals”—in Congress were determined that the North’s victory in the Civil War meant that the country should give formerly enslaved people not only their freedom but also the right to vote and to hold office. In addition, they believed the country should provide land to those who had previously worked other people’s land as their slaves. In other words, formerly enslaved people should be given all the rights of white Americans.
418 PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
American Voices
Jourdon Anderson, Letter to Colonel P. H. Anderson, 1865
15.1
fter Jourdon Anderson and his wife Mandy were freed from slavery on a Tennessee plantation belonging to Colonel P. H. Anderson, they moved north and settled in Dayton, Ohio. A year later, with the war over and the Confederate army disbanded, Colonel Anderson wrote to his former slaves asking them to return as employees. Jourdan Anderson responded to his former master:
As to my freedom, which you say I can have, there is nothing to be gained on that score, as i got my free-papers in 1864 from the Provost-Marshall-General of the Department at Nashville. Mandy says she would be afraid to go back without some proof that you are sincerely disposed to treat us fairly and justly—and we have concluded to test your sincerity by asking you to send us our wages for the time we served you. This will make us forget and forgive old scores, and rely on your justice and friendship in the future. I served you faithfully for thirty-two years and Mandy twenty years. At $25 a month for me, and $2 a week for Mandy, our earnings would amount to $11,680. Add to this the interest for the time our wages has been kept and deduct what you paid for our clothing and three doctors visits to me and pulling a tooth for Mandy, and the balance will show what we are in justice entitled to.... If you fail to pay us for faithful labors in the past we can have little faith in your promises in the future. We trust the good Maker has opened your eyes to the wrongs which you
and your fathers have done to me and my fathers, in making us toil for generations without recompense. Here I draw my wages every Saturday night, but in Tennessee there was never any pay day for the negroes any more than for the horses and cows. Surely there will be a day of reckoning for those who defraud the laborer of his hire.
Jourdon Anderson
P.S. -Say howdy to George Carter, and thank him for taking the pistol from you when you were shooting at me.
Source: John David Smith, Black Voices From Reconstruction, 1865-1877 (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1997), pp. 43-44.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What examples can you find in the document of Jourdon Anderson's sense of humor?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Why would Colonel Anderson invite Jourdon Anderson back to work on the plantation where he had been a slave? How do you think the former slave owner responded to this letter from Jourdon Anderson?
A similar kind of split existed over the proper ways to readmit states to the Union. Lincoln and many other Republicans had argued throughout the war that the Southern states had never left the United States; after all, preserving the Union had been the initial reason that the North went to war in 1861. If the Southern states had never left, there was little to do at war’s end but for them to conduct elections for local and national office and resume their place in the nation. Others, however, especially the Radical Republicans, argued that after 4 years of fighting against the Union, the states of the former Confederacy were effectively out of the country and could be readmitted only after some period in which the federal government sought to reconstruct state governments to ensure that those who led the rebellion traitors, as the radicals always called them—would not lead the new state governments and that the full civil rights of African-Americans would be ensured. The difference of opinion was significant, and compromise was not easy.
While Lincoln pondered the question of the vote and argued that the debate over the term readmission was a distraction from the work at hand, he did take another step that would have far-reaching significance in what was to come. Lincoln Proposed establishing a federal Bureau of Freedmen, Refugees and Abandoned Lands.
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 419
i
Freedmen's Bureau
Agency established by Congress in March 1865 to provide social, educational, and economic services as well as advice and protection to former slaves.
Presidential Reconstruction
Name given to the immediate post-Civil War era, 1865-1866, when President Andrew Johnson took the lead to return full rights to the former Confederate states.
Congressional Reconstruction
Name given to the period 1867-1870 when the Republican-dominated Congress controlled Reconstruction era policy. Sometimes it is also known as Radical Reconstruction.
The Freedmen’s Bureau, as it came to be known, would last longer and do more than Lincoln ever imagined when he signed the legislation authorizing it in March 1865.
Lincoln placed great faith in the new government established in Louisiana after the Union victories there. The new legislature pledged loyalty to the Union, created a public school system, and after it was proposed ratified the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery. It had not, however, granted former slaves the right to vote. Lincoln pondered the question of whether Louisiana could be brought into proper practical relation with the Union sooner by sustaining, or by discarding, her new state government. His own answer was clear: he believed that the Louisiana government could eventually extend the vote and would provide a model of transition back into the Union for other Confederate states. The more radical members of Congress did not want to give Louisiana full rights as a state until it had guaranteed that blacks would be given the right to vote. They blocked counting Louisiana’s electoral votes in the 1864 election and the seating of the state’s new senators. They would soon do more.
The post-Civil War era is often described as including three distinct time periods. The first period is referred to as Presidential Reconstruction in 1865-66, when President Johnson sought to return states to their prewar status with only the institution of slavery being abolished. The next period is known as the more radical Congressional Reconstruction (sometimes Radical Reconstruction), which began when Congress began to challenge Johnson in 1867 and generally continued through
This illustration from Harper's Weekly shows agents of the Freedmen's Bureau trying to settle a dispute between white and black Southerners. The Freedmen's Bureau took an active role in the lives of citizens in a way that the federal government had never done before, managing disputes, organizing schools, and ensuring political rights for recently enfranchised African-Americans.
420 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
the end of Grant’s two terms in 1877. The last period, known as “Redemption” (by its defenders but not by those who lost rights in the process), began with the election of Rutherford B. Hayes in November 1876 and involved the withdrawal of federal troops from the South as well as the return of white-only governments. That last period culminated in the 1890s with the virtual disenfranchisement of all blacks in the South.
Although this typical chronology is far too simplistic, it does provide an accurate framework for the reconstruction process. The reality of the process was much more complex. Many factions battled from 1865 well into the 1880s and 1890s. Johnson was challenged even during his first years in office. Congressional Reconstruction had many ups and downs. Grant generally agreed with the Congressional radicals, those Congressional leaders and their black and white allies in the South who sought to transform the former Confederacy into a racially integrated region with equal rights. Nevertheless, in every year between 1867 and 1877, those who sought a radical Reconstruction of the South met resistance, often very effective resistance in the South and a growing inclination of Northerners to look the other way as they grew tired of the effort. Perhaps most important, the end of Reconstruction did not come all at once. It was a long process involving defeats and successes throughout the country.
Redemption
A term used by opponents of Reconstruction for the era in which the federal government ended its involvement in Southern affairs, and southern whites took control of state governments and ended black political rights.
15.1
The Presidential Reconstruction of Andrew Johnson, 1865-1866
When Andrew Johnson became president on April 15, 1865, he had served as vice president for only 6 weeks. Even so, he came to the presidency with far more experience than Lincoln had in 1861. Like Lincoln, Johnson grew up in poverty, but he had risen in Tennessee politics from city alderman to member of the state legislature, to Congress, to two terms as governor to the U.S. Senate. When Tennessee seceded from the Union in 1861, Johnson—apart from any other Senator from a Confederate State—stayed loyal to the Union and stayed in the Senate. He had long seen himself as a spokesman for the “honest yeomen” of Tennessee, and he hated what he called the state’s “papered, bloated...slaveocracy.” During the Civil War, Johnson served with distinction as military governor of Tennessee in those parts of the state where the Union army had taken control. When the Republicans met in 1864 to nominate Lincoln for a second term, incumbent Vice President Hannibal Hamlin offered little to the ticket; his home state of Maine was sure to go Republican and he had played virtually no role in the war. The choice of Johnson as Lincolns running mate—a border state senator and governor might add essential votes. Although two previous vice presidents had succeeded to the presidency, no one expected it to happen again.
When Johnson became president after Lincoln died, many of those known as the Radical Republicans in Congress embraced him. These so-called radicals wanted to be sure that the end of the Civil War did not bring merely a return to a version of the prewar status quo minus slavery but, instead, wanted the whole South to be “reconstructed” to assure economic, educational, and political equality for the former slaves. The radicals were often a minority in the Congress and the country, where many were willing to accept second-class status for former slaves, but the radicals
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 421
Black Codes
Laws passed by states and municipalities denying many rights of citizenship to free blacks and to control black labor, mobility, and employment.
had the clearest agenda for what they wanted to see happen, and every act of postwar Southern resistance tended to strengthen their hand. In 1864, Johnson had said, “Treason must be made odious, and traitors must be punished and impoverished.” And he repeated similar views to members of Congress who met with him right after Lincoln’s assassination. Ohio Senator Benjamin F. Wade said, “By the Gods, there will be no trouble now in running the government.” Another was overheard saying, “I believe, that the Almighty continued Mr. Lincoln in office as long as he was useful, and then substituted a better man to finish the work.”
When Johnson announced his plans for Reconstruction on May 29, 1865, there was widespread disappointment. Johnson supported the Thirteenth Amendment, already passed by Congress and ratified by several states, and insisted that support for the amendment be a condition for the readmission of any Confederate state to the union. But Johnson refused to go beyond that. He made it clear that he had little interest in political rights for former slaves. In contrast to his earlier claims, Johnson declared a full amnesty and pardon for most of those who had taken part in the rebellion as long as they were willing to pledge loyalty to the Union and support the end of slavery. The amnesty included restoration of all land taken by the Union army. There were exceptions to Johnson’s amnesty, however. Major Confederate officials and individuals who owned more than $20,000 in taxable property had to seek individual presidential pardons.
At first glance, the policy seemed tough on the South or at least on the former slaveholders of the South—perhaps tougher than Lincoln would have been—and consistent with Johnson’s pledge to keep slaveholders “out in the cold.” But soon, many wondered how many individual presidential pardons would be granted as they realized that Johnson was granting many more than they had expected. Blacks, though now free, seemed destined to be excluded from most of the rights of citizenship in the Johnson plan. If former slaveholders were to be given back their land, what land would there be for former slaves? Illinois Congressman Elihu B. Washburne said, “I have grounds to fear President Johnson may hold almost unconquerable prejudices against the African race.”
While the Radical Republicans in Congress were terribly disappointed, many Southern whites were delighted at the opportunity to create a “white man’s government,” if they accepted the end of slavery. Under Johnson’s plan, former Confederate states were readmitted as soon as they ratified the Thirteenth Amendment, and the new state governments that were quickly organized in the South were recognized by Johnson as the legitimate government of these states. (Since most Republicans continued to insist that the rebellious states had never left the Union, there was no official way or time for them to be readmitted.) Once recognized, these state governments, dominated by many of the same people who had been in power before the Civil War, began passing laws strictly limiting black rights, most of all, the right to vote. In addition, hunting, fishing, free grazing of livestock, which whites all assumed were their rights and which some slaves had enjoyed, were now declared illegal for blacks in a series of what were known as Black Codes, passed by states across the South, beginning with Mississippi’s code passed in November 1865. One part of the Mississippi code said:
All freedmen, free negroes and mulattoes in the State, over the age of eighteen, found on the second Monday in January, 1866, or thereafter, with no lawful employment or business, or found unlawful assembling themselves together, either in the day or nit time, and all white persons assembling with freedmen,
Free negroes or mulattoes, or unusually associating... on terms of equality... shall be deemed vagrants.
422 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
In many states, Black Codes either made it illegal for an African-American to own a gun or taxed guns at high rates. In cities, new urban police forces, like the one in Mississippi in 1865, were designed to keep good order and discipline amongst the negro population. Police patrols not only enforced the law but also often terrorized blacks, especially those who refused to sign long-term labor contracts with former slave masters. Any former slave who ran away from a labor contract could be either arrested and returned to the plantation holding that contract or sentenced to a chain gang to pay off the fine for running away. African-Americans in Louisiana noted how similar the contracts were to slavery and how similar the new police were to the old slave patrols. They also asked “why men who but a few months since were in armed rebellion against the government should now have arms put in their hands. Johnson s amnesty, especially his expectation that these states would reassume all the rights of any other state, made these oppressive developments almost inevitable.
15.1
j j
Congressional Radical Reconstruction, 1867-1869
The new Congress that was elected with Lincoln in November 1864 did not assemble until December 1865—8 months after his death. This Congress had an overwhelming Republican majority, including many who had become disillusioned with Johnson by the time they met, especially as they saw what was happening in the states that had so recently been at war with the Union. The new president, they thought, was clearly siding with the former slaveholders rather than the former slaves.
Those in Congress most unhappy with Johnson, the Radical Republicans, were led by Charles Sumner in the Senate and Thaddeus Stevens in the House. Stevens told the House, “The whole fabric of southern society must be changed, and never can it be done if this opportunity is lost.” For Stevens, the core values of the Republican Party remained, as the party’s campaign slogan said, “free labor” by “free men” who earned their livelihoods by the sweat of their own brows. But with Johnson moving quickly to recognize the new state governments in the old Confederacy and those governments passing rigid Black Codes, the moment seemed to be quickly slipping away. Johnson focused on the Constitutional clause giving each state the right to set up its own government and arrangements for voting. Stevens and the radicals focused on a different part of the Constitution, the clause guaranteeing each state a republican form of government.
Most of the Republicans in Congress were not as radical as Stevens or Sumner. In 1865, a majority probably still had reservations about black voting rights. Even so, nearly all were disappointed at Johnson’s easy amnesty of so many former Confederate leaders and the way Southern states were coming back into the Union with their old leaders in power. They discredited Johnson s version of Reconstruction because the results resembled the antebellum South in far too many ways. In particular, the fact that 58 members of the Confederate Congress, six Confederate cabinet officers, andthe vice president of the Confederacy were all elected to Congress in 1865 and 1866 symbolized the failure of Johnson’s policy to bring about meaningful change. However, the Constitution also gave Congress its own specific ways of asserting its authority.
Pennsylvania Congressman Thaddeus Stevens wanted Reconstruction to mean a thorough reordering of Southern society in which former slaves would receive land and guaranteed voting rights from the federal government.
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 423
Soon after convening in December 1865, Congress created a Joint Committee on Reconstruction. Moderate Senator William Pitt Fessenden of Maine was appointed chair, and most of the radicals, including Stevens, were excluded. Nevertheless, Congress undermined presidential Reconstruction by refusing to seat the Congressional delegates from the former Confederate states, even though Johnson considered those states to be fully restored to the Union. (Johnson’s use of “restoration” rather than “reconstruction” irked many in Congress who wanted to see at least some change rather than restoring states to the place they had held in 1860.) Despite Johnson’s insistence that the states had a right to be represented in Congress, the reality was that the Constitution made each house of Congress sole judge of the qualifications of its members, and neither house was ready to seat former Confederate leaders. Senator Ben Wade demanded that no Southern state be given a vote in Congress until African-Americans had the right to vote in that state. Others called for the creation of territorial governments in the former Confederate states, which would be under the control of Congress so that both voting rights and land redistribution could be assured. But Congress itself was divided, and action beyond rejecting the delegates from the South was hard to come by. Even legislation to give blacks in the District of Columbia the right to vote—something Congress clearly had authority to do—could not make it through both houses, especially after a December 1865 referendum of white voters in the District rejected black voting rights 6,951 to 35.
Early in 1866, Illinois Senator Lyman Trumbull proposed two new pieces of legislation. Unlike the more radical Republicans, Trumbull still maintained a good working relationship with Johnson and worried about the federal government exceeding its authority. But given developments in the South, Trumbull felt Congress had the authority—even the duty—to protect the rights of newly freed African-Americans under the Thirteenth Amendment, which included language giving Congress the power to pass laws to enforce the amendment.
First, Trumbull proposed extending the life of the Freedmen’s Bureau. When Lincoln signed the legislation creating the Bureau, it was envisioned as a 1-year transitional body. However, through late 1865 and early 1866, the Freedmen’s Bureau was the key federal agency distributing food to former slaves, supporting the establishment of schools, and in some cases, even helping former slaves gain their own land. After consulting with the head of the bureau, General O.O. Howard, Trumbull became convinced that its work would take many years and proposed extending it to 1870. He also proposed giving it new authority to ensure that blacks had all “civil rights belonging to white persons” and giving bureau agents the authority to press charges against state officials who denied those rights.
Trumbull then proposed the far-reaching Civil Rights Bill of 1866 that defined all persons born in the United States (except Indians) as citizens, permanently ending the Dred Scott distinctions between whites and blacks. Although the bill was silent on the issue of voting, given that many of the citizens it referred to—women and children, for example—could not vote, it explicitly guaranteed rights to make contracts, bring lawsuits, and have the equal benefit of the laws without regard to race. The law declared that such provisions were “fundamental rights belonging to every man as a free man.” It also authorized federal authorities to prosecute violations in federal courts, a significant provision since Southern state courts were quickly reverting to their white-dominated ways.
424 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Both of Trumbull s bills would have appeared radical a year or two earlier, but in 1866, they were seen as moderate proposals from a moderate Senator, and everyone expected smooth sailing for them. Then, after they passed Congress easily, President Johnson vetoed both bills. He called the Freedmen’s Bureau an "immense patronage” system that exceeded the constitutional authority of the federal government, and he characterized the civil rights bill an as unwarranted "concentration of all legislative powers in the national Government.” In his veto of the Civil Rights bill, Johnson also went out of his way to say that giving blacks citizenship rights was wrong and that "the distinction of race and color is by the bill made to operate in favor of the colored and against the white race.”
The vetoes ended congressional efforts to work with the president on Reconstruction. Trumbull attacked the president. Senator William Pitt Fessenden, up to then considered a moderate, predicted that Johnson would "veto every other bill we pass.” Johnson was prepared to do just that. He wanted to court Northern Democrats and Southern whites in his bid for a second term. Congress passed both pieces of legislation over Johnson’s vetoes and began to use a veto-proof two-thirds majority to pass similar legislation in spite of presidential opposition. The era of presidential-led Reconstruction was fast coming to an end.
After passing Trumbull’s two major bills over the president’s veto in the spring of 1866, Congress proposed another amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Amendments to the Constitution proposed in Congress are not subject to a presidential veto, although three-fourths of the state legislatures need to agree to them. So in 1866, Congress set out to put the Civil Rights law into the Constitution itself. Agreement to do so came quickly; however, agreement on the other provisions of the amendment came much more slowly. Congress was not yet ready to give all black males the same voting rights that all white males had, but Sumner and some other radicals would never support an amendment that did not guarantee such rights. When their opposition was combined with the Democratic minority who did not want any new rights inscribed in the Constitution, crafting the amendment became a major hurdle. Many members of Congress wanted to punish any state that withheld the vote from black males, but they did not want to punish those states—currently all of them—that withheld the vote from women or those states—including several in the North—that made it hard for recent immigrants to vote. All of these issues led to months of wrangling, but the compromise that emerged as the Fourteenth Amendment guaranteeing rights of citizenship to former slaves and others born or naturalized in the United States was nevertheless significant.
The key provision of the Fourteenth Amendment said:
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
Other clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment stated changes drastically different from the Three-Fifth’s clause and other previously accepted parts of the Constitution. They included language saying that any state that limited the voting rights of male
Chapter 15 Reconstruction
15.1

Union Leagues
In the South, a Republican Party organization led by African-Americans, which became an important organizing device after 1865.
inhabitants of a state would have its representation in Congress reduced, that any person who had held federal office and then participated in rebellion against the government could not again hold office, and that Confederate debts were null and void as far as the federal government was concerned.
Both houses of Congress finally passed the amendment in June 1866 and sent it to the states for ratification. Just as Johnson had refused to recognize a state as having returned to the Union until it ratified the Thirteenth Amendment, Congress now refused to seat the members of the House or Senate elected by a state until the state had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment. The amendment was popular in the North and many in the South were anxious to return to Congress, so approval from the required three-quarters of the states came quickly and the amendment was ratified in July 1868.
When Congress reconvened in December 1866, the majority of Republicans had no interest in working with Johnson. While the president called for immediate restoration of the “now unrepresented States” to Congress, Congress decided that, in fact, the states of the former Confederacy needed to be governed directly from Washington until “some indefinite future time.” Some said that Congress was raising the bar after earlier requiring only assent to the Fourteenth Amendment, but the majority in Congress were no longer in any mood to compromise.
In January 1867, Congress quickly passed a law—over presidential veto-giving black males in the District of Columbia the right to vote. Since the district was directly controlled by Congress, they could pass such a law even though the Fifteenth Amendment, giving all black males the same voting rights as white males, was not yet contemplated. Congressional leaders then turned to more far-reaching legislation. They passed the Reconstruction Act of 1867, which declared all Southern state governments—already recognized by Johnson—to be inoperative and divided the former Confederate states into five military districts, ordering the military to oversee the writing of new constitutions that would guarantee universal male suffrage (see Map 15-1). Only after these new constitutions were in place, and after a state had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, would Congress admit its representatives to Congress.
The president protested that the Reconstruction Act was, “the death-knell of civil liberty.” African-Americans in the South, however, embraced the opportunity to participate in the political process. In addition to registering to vote and participating in constitution writing, blacks struck for higher pay in Charleston, Savannah, Mobile, Richmond, and New Orleans. Blacks in Richmond demanded integrated horse-drawn streetcars. Across the South, they created Union Leagues that became a base for political action and mutual support. The leagues offered opportunities to gain experience in the political process or, as one former slave said, “We just went there, and we talked a little, made speeches on one question and another.” Former slaves became political leaders. By 1867, James H. Jones, the former “body servant” to Jefferson Davis, was a featured speaker at Republican meetings across the South.
The Final Break—Johnson's impeachment
By 1867, President Johnson had become virtually irrelevant to federal Reconstruction policy. Congress passed laws, the president vetoed them, and Congress passed them over the president’s veto. But the Freedmans Bureau was under the control of the president even if he vetoed the bill that kept it going. The creation of military districts in the South also gave the president significant powers as commander-in-chief, even though he had opposed creating them.
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
- Z
15.1
MD z
free 1864 free 1
wv
MC free 1865
' 1870 I
KY
free 1865
AK
1868
GA
1870
(1872)
TX
1870 (1873)
Reconstruction of the South, 1865 1877
Date refers to readmission to Union (i.e., 1868)
Date refers to re-establishment of conservative government (i.e., 1874) ES Reconstruction government set up under Lincoln US Reconstruction government set up under Johnson CZ] Five military districts by Reconstruction Act, 1867
Abolition of slavery in the South
MB
Seceded states by Emancipation Proclamation, 1863 (except territories held by Union in 1863 free by state action)
L....I
Delaware and Kentucky by Thirteenth Amendment, 1865; Maryland, Missouri, and West Virginia by state action



\

V
MAP 15-1 Southern Military Districts. Having lost all faith in President Johnson's leadership, the Congress in 1867 created five military districts to govern the states of the former Confederacy until new state constitutions that guaranteed the rights, including voting rights, of African-Americans were put in place.
Some in Congress began to consider removing Johnson in early 1867, but they ere in a minority. Instead, Congress passed a number of laws that most hoped ould keep Reconstruction moving in spite of the president. One law required all residential orders to the military to pass through the army chief, General Grant, "fore going to commanders in the field. Grant was known to side with Congress, ad this strategy seemed like an important safeguard and a significant limitation f Johnson’s power. Congress also passed the Tenure of Office Act, which said that ay person whose appointment required the Senate’s consent, namely, members of cabinet and ambassadors, could be replaced only when the Senate approved a iccessor. The goal of the act was to ensure that Secretary of War Stanton, who had sen appointed by Lincoln and who took a tough stance on Reconstruction, stayed
i office.
These Congressional actions might have worked had Johnson been willing to lay a passive role, but Johnson could be stubborn, proud, and self-focused. His loyal scretary of the Navy Gideon Welles said, “He has no confidantes and seeks none.” As result, unlike Lincoln, Johnson was often out of touch with congressional thinking.
Chapter 15 Rea
iction 427’
These traits set the stage for an even more serious collision between the president and the Congress.
While Congress took charge of Reconstruction, Johnson became convinced that he had public opinion on his side and began to encourage opponents of Reconstruction, in the North and South. He also removed several of the tougher military commanders in the South and replaced them with officers who were willing to let events take their own course, which meant letting former Confederates take control of local governments and use their power to undermine black rights. Then in February 1868, after the Senate refused Johnson’s request to remove Stanton, the president, in violation of the Tenure of Office act, fired him. It was a clear challenge to congressional authority.
Under the U.S. Constitution, a president can be removed only for “high crimes and misdemeanors,” terms the Constitution does not define. But the procedure for impeachment is clear. The House of Representatives is required to act as a sort of Grand Jury, deciding whether or not to bring charges, called impeachment, against the president. Then the Senate, with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presiding, acts as a jury to hear and vote on the charges. Only with a Senate vote to convict can a president be removed from office.
Led by Thaddeus Stevens, the House, with every Republican voting positively, agreed on a long list of charges, most having to do with Johnson’s violation of the Tenure of Office Act but also a charge saying that the president had tried to bring Congress “into disgrace.” However, the trial in the Senate did not go as well for the radicals. Removing a president was very serious business, and it was unclear that Johnson’s obstructionism met the level of a “high crime.” It was also not clear that the Tenure of Office Act was constitutional. Johnson claimed that he meant the firing of Stanton to be tested in the Supreme Court. If Johnson were removed, then Senator Ben Wade, president pro tern of the Senate, would become president since there was no vice president, and many who disliked Johnson also disliked Wade. When the Senate finally voted in mid-May of 1868, Johnson survived by one vote. Johnson could serve out his term in relative peace, although his chances for the Democratic nomination and reelection were slim.
The Right to Vote—Grant's Election and the Fifteenth Amendment
After Johnson’s impeachment was resolved, both parties turned to selecting nominees for the presidential election in the fall of 1868. For the Republicans, the choice was easy. Ulysses S. Grant as commander of the army had supported the Republicans in Congress on the issues of Reconstruction; his own attitudes on race had been significantly reshaped by the courage shown by black troops during the Civil War, and he was the nation’s war hero. Ihe Republicans easily nominated him along with the Speaker of the House Schuyler Colfax of Indiana as his running mate. Grant ran on a cautious platform that nevertheless embraced extending voting rights to former slaves. His slogan was, “Let Us Have Peace.”
Democrats were divided on issues of personality, on their opposition to Congressional Reconstruction, and on fiscal policies—whether to continue to authorize the printing of money, or “greenbacks,” based on the federal promise to pay. After 21 ballots in which a number of candidates, including Andrew Johnson, failed to win the nomination, they chose former New York Governor Horatio Seymour, who had flirted with supporting the Confederacy during the war and who had called protesters in the New York Draft Riot “my friends.” For vice president,
428 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
they nominated a former Union general from Missouri, Francis Blair, who called for an end to Reconstruction, which he called the rule of aa semi-barbarous race ofblacks.”
While neither party articulated a fully developed economic policy, the lines between the parties were drawn on the issues of race. August Belmont, one of the nation s leading bankers, said that, in the 1868 election, financial matters paled in comparison with black voting rights. In November, Grant carried most of the North and the parts of the South under federal control, including North and South Carolina and Alabama. Seymour’s home state of New York, along with New Jersey, Georgia, and Louisiana favored Seymour. The state governments in Florida, Mississippi, and Texas had not yet been recognized, and those states did not vote. Grant won 53 percent of the popular vote but an overwhelming 73 percent of the electoral vote for an easy victory.
With Grant about to become president, Republicans in Congress moved quickly on the issue of voting rights. In February 1869, Congress passed the Fifteenth Amendment, which stated:
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
Harper's Weekly carried many illustrations of the changes happening in the South to Northern audience . This issue of July 1868 showed the enthusiasm with which African-Americans, many of whom had been slaves only a few years before, were taking to electoral politics.
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 429
15.1
In a little less than a year, by February 1870, the required three-fourths of the states ratified the amendment and the right of former slaves, and other citizens, including the children of Chinese immigrants—who were citizens but had also been denied the right to vote—had been inscribed in the Constitution.
As powerful as the language of the Fifteenth Amendment is, it lacked some wording that many had wanted to include. The radicals had wanted the amendment to state that neither the right to vote nor the right to hold office could be abridged. But others feared that several Northern states, including California with its large Chinese population, might reject the amendment if the right of nonwhite people to hold office were included. Many also had wanted wording to prohibit the many tricks that some Southern governments were already using to limit the black vote, including literacy tests that could be manipulated to exclude whoever the test giver wanted excluded, or tests related to property or education. Supporters of the amendment, however, worried that they would lose too much Northern support if they included such clauses. Massachusetts and Connecticut used literacy tests to limit voting by foreign-born citizens, while Pennsylvania and Rhode Island had property or tax qualifications for voting, and no one wanted to risk losing the support of those states. As a result, important safeguards were not included.
Many women, especially the most prominent leaders of the women’s rights movement, were deeply disappointed and angered by the Fifteenth Amendment. Women like Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Sojourner Truth had labored long and hard in support of abolition and the Union cause, and now they saw women’s right to vote ignored. Frederick Douglass was an advocate of women’s rights in addition to African-American rights, but in 1869, he precipitated along and painful, though temporary, break with Anthony and Stanton over the Fifteenth Amendment. Douglass argued for one step at a time, guaranteeing black men the same rights as white men, and then guaranteeing women of all races the right to vote. Douglass said, “I hold that women, as well as men, have the right to vote, and my heart and my voice go with the movement to extend suffrage to women.” These were not just words. In the decade before and after battles around the Fifteenth Amendment, Douglass actively campaigned for women’s right to vote. But between 1865 and 1870, Douglass was willing to compromise to achieve his immediate goal.
The compromise that Douglass proposed brought a sharp rebuke from the former slave and abolitionist Sojourner Truth. In 1867, at the height of the debate, Truth gave her own passionate response to Douglass. She said that she, too, had been born a slave and rejoiced that “They have got their liberty—so much good luck to have slavery partly destroyed; not entirely. I want it root and branch destroyed.” For Truth, root and branch meant the vote for all. Partial justice would not do, “and if colored men get their rights, and not colored women theirs, you see the colored men will be masters over the women, and it will be just as bad as it was before.”
In spite of compromises and disappointments, many hailed the Fifteenth Amendment as completing the work of abolition. As late as 1868, free blacks could vote in only eight Northern states. In 1870, by law, black men could vote everywhere in the United States. William Lloyd Garrison celebrated “this wonderful, quite sudden transformation...from the auction-block to the ballot-box.” While there was already clear evidence of the many steps—by law and by violence—that would be taken to deny most blacks the right to vote for most of the next century, in 1870, there was also grounds for very real optimism.
15.1
Quick Review Compare Presidential Reconstruction and Congressional Reconstruction. What are the most significant differences between the two plans? Given these differences, was the tension between them inevitable?
430 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
THE IMPACT OF RECONSTRUCTION
15.2
Explain the impact of Reconstruction on African-American life in the South.
In the early years of Reconstruction, many of the Souths former leaders returned to power. Only one Southern official was tried for treason and executed—Henry Wirz, commander of the infamous Andersonville prison where so many Union soldiers died. Jefferson Davis was imprisoned for 2 years but then was freed and retired to write his memoirs. Many other Confederate leaders quickly declared their loyalty to the Union after the war’s end, received a pardon from Johnson, and resumed leadership in their states. Within a year of announcing his plan to exclude the wealthy and the political leaders of the Confederacy from the original amnesty conditions, Johnson had granted 7,000 individual pardons. The prewar status quo seemed to be returning in the Southern states. Then Congress took over Reconstruction, and everything changed. In state legislatures, local sheriff’s offices, and school boards, former slaves, Northern abolitionists, and Southern Unionists took power under the banner of the Republican Party or local Union Leagues. A radical remaking of the South began in the late 1860s and continued into the 1870s.
Voting in the South
In January 1870, the Mississippi state legislature elected Hiram R. Revels to the United States Senate. Revels was the first African-American ever elected to the Senate. The legislature that elected Revels included 40 blacks and 100 whites—hardly a black-dominated body. He was elected, ironically, to fill Jefferson Davis’s former seat, left vacant since Davis departed in 1861.
SSZfe African-American senator (left) sits with six of the first blacks elected to the House of Representatives representing Alabama, Florida, South Carolina (three representatives), and Georgia.
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 431
Revels was born free in Fayetteville, North Carolina, in 1827. Like many of the African-American political leaders during Reconstruction, he was a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal Church, serving as a pastor in Baltimore, Maryland, when the Civil War began. Revels organized two all-black regiments and served as their chaplain. At the war’s end, Revels went with his unit to Vicksburg, Mississippi, and then moved to Natchez. He was not initially a candidate for the Senate, but his lack of ambition for the post made him a perfect compromise candidate.
Senator Garrett Davis of Kentucky challenged the right of an African-American to be seated in the Senate. But Revels’s key defender, James Nye of Nevada, told his colleagues, “In 1861 from this hall departed two senators who were representing here the state of Mississippi; one of them who went defiantly was Jefferson Davis.” For Nye, and eventually for a majority in the Senate, nothing was a more fitting symbol of the outcome of the Civil War than the seating of an African-American in the place of the former president of the Confederacy.
Mississippi later sent Blanche K. Bruce to the Senate in 1874. Bruce was born a slave, but he attended Oberlin College and established himself as a planter in Mississippi in 1868. Unlike Revels, he worked his way up the political ladder, serving as the sergeant-at-arms of the Mississippi state senate, assessor and sheriff of Bolivar County, and a member of the Board of Levee Commissioners of the Mississippi River. Navigation on the Mississippi was a major concern of his during his U.S. Senate tenure, as was opposition to Chinese exclusion. Bruce was the last African-American to serve in the Senate until Edward Brooke was elected from Massachusetts in 1966.
More African-Americans were elected to the House. Twenty-two blacks served in Congress during Reconstruction, including 13 who had been born slaves. Between 1871 and 1873, South Carolina had three African-Americans in the House—Joseph H. Rainey, Robert B. Elliott, and Robert G. DeLarge. In the same sessions, Benjamin S. Turner represented Alabama; Josiah T. Walls, Florida; and Joseph Long, Georgia. Rainey served three terms in the House during which time he played an important role in arguing for the first major federal aid to education bill that was considered, although defeated, in Congress.
Reconstruction state governments, with black and white leadership, expanded the right to vote, abolishing restrictions that had existed for black and poor white voters. In addition, newly formulated state constitutions created public school systems and internal improvements designed to bring the South into the modern world. It was a heady time, yet not an easy one.
Schools for Freedom
Northern whites who came to the South with the Union army were amazed by the thirst for literacy demonstrated by former slaves. A member of an education society in North Carolina said, he thought a school-house would be the first proof of their independence. Booker T. Washington, a well-known African-American educator remembered the immediate aftermath of emancipation: “Few people who were not right in the midst of the scenes can form any exact idea of the intense desire which the people of my race showed for education. It was a whole race trying to go to school.”
Realizing that blacks saw the schoolhouse as “proof of their independence” surprised white observers. It did not surprise former slaves who had grown up in a world where literacy, for them, was a crime. As a slave child of seven or eight,
32 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Frederick Douglass had been taught the alphabet by a white woman, but the lessons did not last long. He remembered:
Mr. Auld found out what was going on, and at once forbade Mrs. Auld to instruct me further, telling her, among other things, that it was unlawful, as well as unsafe, to teach a slave to read....It would forever unfit him to be a slave.”
Nothing appealed more to young Douglass than being made unfit for slavery. Douglass found secret ways to continue his studies, and by the time he made his escape to Massachusetts, Douglass had the literacy skills that would make him one of the great orators and writers of his day. Slave masters and slave-state legislatures who made it illegal to teach a slave to read or write, unwittingly also made literacy a powerful symbol of freedom.
While the majority of teachers who went South to teach were white women, an African-American, Charlotte Forten, began teaching in Port Royal, South Carolina, where she said, “The children are well-behaved and eager to learn. It will be a happiness

American Voices
John Roy Lynch, The Work of Reconstruction, 1869
# ohn Roy Lynch was born a slave and elected as a Republican to V the Mississippi legislature in 1869. In this essay, he described what Reconstruction meant to those who, like him, were trying to create a new political system, indeed a new culture, in the states that had been part of the Confederacy only a few years before.
The new administration had an important and difficult task before it. A state government had to be organized from top to bottom. A new judiciary had to be inaugurated, consisting of three justices of the state supreme court, fifteen judges of the circuit court, and twenty chancery court judges, all of whom had to be appointed by the governor, by and with the advice and consent of the [state] senate. In addition to this, a new public school system had to be organized and established. There was not a public school building anywhere in the state except in a few of the larger towns, and they, with possibly a few exceptions, were greatly in need of repair. To erect the necessary school-houses and to reconstruct and repair those already in existence so as to afford educational facilities for both races was by no means an easy task. It necessitated a very large outlay of cash in the beginning which resulted in a material increase in the rate of taxation for the time being, but the constitution called for the establishment of the system and, of course, the work had to be done. It was not only done, but it was done creditably and as economically as circumstances and conditions at that time made
possible. That system, though slightly changed, still stands as a creditable monument to the work of the first Republican state administration that was organized in the state of Mississippi under the Reconstruction Acts of the Congress.
It was also necessary to reorganize, reconstruct, and in many instances, rebuild some of the penal, charitable, and other public institutions of the state. A new code of laws also had to be adopted to take the place of the old one, and thus wipe out the black laws that had been passed by what was known as the Johnson legislature. Also it was necessary to change the statutes of the state to harmonize with the new order of things. This was no easy task, especially in view of the fact that a heavy increase in the rate of taxation was thus made necessary.
Source: John Hope Franklin, editor, Reminiscences of an Active Life: The Autobiography of John Roy Lynch (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1970),
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to Lynch, what were the most important priorities of the new Republican governments?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What light does the document shed on the challenges faced by Republican governments during Reconstruction?
Chapter 15 Reconstruction
A school operated by the Freedman's Bureau in Richmond, Virginia, was shown in this September 1866 issue of Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper.
to teach here.” By 1870, several thousand teachers—whites and blacks, Northern immigrants, and veterans of the Confederate army—were teaching in schools for former slaves. Although a majority stayed for only a year or two, some found their life’s work in these schools.
Many newly free African-Americans welcomed Northern white teachers for the long term, but they also wanted teachers from their own communities. The Freedmen’s Bureau and Northern missionary groups helped in founding black colleges in the South, including Atlanta, Fisk, Hampton, and Tugaloo, which were specifically designed to train black teachers, often in a short course that lasted 1 or 2 years. Ihe results of the new efforts at teacher preparation were impressive, and as early as 1869, the bureau reported that of the 3,000 teachers for the freedmen, the majority were now African-American.
The Reconstruction Act of 1867 also fostered the growth of Southern schooling. The 1867 act required states of the former Confederacy to call state conventions to rewrite their state constitutions, and the new constitutions were expected to include support for public education. Later, even as state after state returned to white rule, the public school system remained. In Black Reconstruction in America, W.E.B. Du Bois, a renowned African-American activist, wrote, “Public education for all at public expense was, in the South, a Negro idea.”
The Reality of Sharecropping
For many newly freed slaves, another issue was as important as the vote or education^ land. In Virginia, a freedman told a Union army officer that, if the army had a right to take away the master s slaves, then they “had the right to take master’s land too.
434 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877

In Alabama, a state convention delegate insisted, "the property which they hold was nearly all earned by the sweat of our brows.” Those closest to the land, who had worked it for no pay, valued land and the promise of land ownership. Land provided independent economic opportunity on which freedom rested.
When Shermans army arrived in Savannah, Georgia, in December 1864, the army of 60,000 troops was accompanied by some 20,000 former slaves. Sherman met with local blacks in Savannah. Garrison Frazier, a leader of that group, made it clear what they wanted: freedom and land, which meant "placing us where we could reap the fruit of our own labor.” Four days later, Shermans Special Field Order No. 15 provided for 40-acre parcels of land for black families, which was to be taken from the plantations of owners in active rebellion on the Sea Islands and coastal areas in Georgia and, later, in South Carolina (once his army got there). Sherman also offered army mules that were no longer needed. Thus, 40 acres and a mule became the symbol of freedom to many, and by June 1865, 40,000 newly freed people were settled on “Sherman land” in the former Confederacy. Shermans order did not make it clear whether the land grant was temporary or permanent, but the link of freedom and land was permanent in the minds of many.
President Johnson wasted no time ending the redistribution of land after taking office. He ordered an end to the “40 acres and a mule” policy. As head of the Freedman’s Bureau, General O. O. Howard had expanded Sherman’s original South Carolina plan, instructing his agents to “set aside” 40-acre tracts for individual
! 15.3
THINKING HISTORICALLY
John W. Alvord's First Report to the Freedmen's Bureau, 1866
John W. Alvord was an unusually perceptive observer who was in charge of setting up schools for the Freedmen's Bureau. In his first report to the bureau in Washington, DC, in 1866, Alvord noted, somewhat to his surprise, that there were often black-initiated schools already in operation when he arrived to open schools. Thus, he wrote in his first report:
Throughout the entire South an effort is being made by the colored people to educate themselves....In the absence of other teaching they are determined to be self-taught; and everywhere some elementary text-book, or the fragment of one, may be seen in the hands of negroes....Native schools... are making their appearance through the interior of the entire country.
A more detailed reading of the report makes it clear that Alvord was surprised first by the commitment of the newly freed people to education, second by their sense of initiative in launching their own schools even before any
federal or missionary teachers arrived, and third by the sense of self-respect and self-determination that those running the schools were maintaining.
Source: John W. Alvord, Inspector's Report of Schools and Finances. U.S. Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen and Abandoned Lands. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1866, pp. 9-10, cited in James Anderson, The Education of Blacks in the South, I860-1935 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1988), pp. 6-7.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What does Alvord's surprise at finding "Native schools" say about the way African-Americans were perceived?
2.	Historical Interpretation
How do you account for the determination to be self-taught and to develop their own schools by people who only a year before had been enslaved by others and who many portrayed as passive?
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 435
15.2
Sharecropping
Labor system that evolved during and after Reconstruction whereby landowners furnished laborers with a house, farm animals, tools, and advanced credit in exchange for a share of the laborers'crop.
freedmen. Blacks across the South quickly began farming their own plots. Johnson overrode Howard’s order, issued pardons to former plantation owners, and ordered Howard to restore the land to them, which meant taking it away from those who were currently using it. Once land had been returned to its former owners, there was very little chance that former slaves would regain their parcels.
In October 1865, General Howard made a painful journey to Edisto Island in South Carolina to announce the president’s order. A committee of freedmen drafted their response:
General, we want Homesteads...if the government having concluded to befriend its late enemies and to neglect to observe the principles of common faith between its self and us its allies in the war you said was over, now takes away from them all right to the soil they stand upon save such as they can get by again working for your late and their all time enemies... .You will see this is not the condition of really freemen.
Redistribution of land, it seemed, was not going to be part of Reconstruction.
In a few places, however, former slaves were able to purchase or win government land. Having spent their lives in unpaid labor, few slaves had any resources to buy land, even when it was being sold very cheaply in the aftermath of the war. In South Carolina, which had an exceptionally strong Reconstruction government, the legislature established a state land commission that provided grants of land to some 14,000 black families—perhaps one-seventh of the state’s black population—in various parts of the state. They also created the town of Promised Land, which continues as a black-led community to the present.
The primary economic opportunity open to slaves was to return to the plantations where they had worked in the past, but do so as paid employees. Neither former slaves nor former slave owners found the prospect encouraging. One Georgia planter complained that, “Once we had reliable labor controlled at will. Now...it is both uncertain and unreliable.” When railroads or new enterprises offered jobs, blacks left the plantations to take other work.
During the Johnson-dominated Reconstruction, Southern landowners not only reclaimed their lands but also ensured the passage of vagrancy laws made it a crime to be without a job, which meant former slaves had to take whatever was offered or be jailed. Some landowners agreed to hire only their own former slaves, making it extremely difficult for newly free people to bargain for wages or move to better opportunities.
Many in Washington were pleased to see blacks become wage earners, paid for raising the cotton, sugar, rice, and tobacco they had previously raised without pay as slaves. But former slaves did not like working for wages, especially the low wages that were offered for work in the same places where they had once labored as slaves. Wageearning blacks resented their status as what some called “wage slaves.” They wanted land of their own, and if they could not get land—and in most parts of the South they could not—they wanted a share in the profits of their work.
Given the dissatisfaction that both white landowners and black workers felt, a new economic arrangement was born: sharecropping. Sharecropping meant just what the name implied. Instead of working for wages, former slaves worked as independent entrepreneurs who were guaranteed a share of the crop in return for their labor. At the same time, landowners, who provided the land, the seeds, and the loans to get through the year, also received a share of the crop.
As this agricultural economy developed after the Civil War, the owner of a large tract of land (almost always a former plantation owner who had the land returned
436 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Edisto Island, off the coast of South Carolina, was one of the first places where the government provided land and mules—and mule carts. Former slaves quickly used the opportunity to become independent farmers.
by the Johnson administration) agreed to provide crude housing, a short-term loan for living expenses (known as the “furnish” and usually provided at the beginning of the growing season in March), seed, fertilizer, tools, and the right to grow cotton on a specified piece of land 15 to 40 acres in area. Landless tenants (almost always former slaves) agreed to work the land, plant, weed or “chop” the cotton through the growing season, and bring in a crop. Landowner and sharecropper would then split the profits after the harvest.
Once the harvest was done, just before Christmas at “the settle,” the landowner would provide the sharecropper with a statement of accounts showing the value of the cotton harvest, the cost of the “furnish,” and any other loans or purchases at the commissary on the plantation (usually the only place the sharecropper could buy goods and often a place where prices were very high), and the difference or profit due to the sharecropper. Everyone knew that many planters cheated their often illiterate tenants. Asking for a detailed accounting meant risking one’s home and perhaps one’s life. Few took the risk, though many sharecroppers were privately furious when the end-of-year payments were finally made and, somehow, the results for those who had worked all year were so modest.
Sharecropping began on the sugar plantations of Louisiana and quickly spread to the rest of the agricultural South. With sharecropping, black workers had a significant new incentive to work since they retained a portion of the profits they created. Women and children, who had resisted work in the field for wages, now returned to the fields as families sought to make a living.
At first, landowners were far from enthusiastic about sharecropping. While it meant that they no longer needed to supervise employees, they did not like the sense
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 437
Homes for sharecroppers were not much different from the cabins that had been built in the old slave quarters.
of independence that sharecropping brought to former slaves. They also disliked the shift from having farm work done by gangs of laborers, as had been the case in slavery and wageearning times, to having the work done by family units on smaller plots. One South Carolina planter complained about the black-led Union Leagues that fostered sharecropping saying, “Their leaders counsel them not to work for wages at all, but to insist upon setting up for themselves.” Nevertheless, by the early 1870s, sharecropping had become the primary means of agricultural organization in much of the South, especially the region’s great cottongrowing heartland (see Map 15-2).
|1860 |
MAP 15-2 Sharecropping Reshapes a Plantation. These two maps show the changes in the living and work arrangements on the Barrow Plantation in Oglethorpe County, Georgia, between the last days of slavery in 1860 and the establishment of sharecropping in 1881. By the latter date, the old Slave Quarter had disappeared replaced by dispersed cottages of the sharecropping families, each of whom worked a portion of the land.
438 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Before long, plantation owners found ways to manipulate it for their own ends. Owners developed a credit system whereby a plantation-store sold everything from food to clothing on credit to the sharecroppers to be repaid when the crop was harvested. Many plantation owners made as much money with their stores as with their crops. With crops mortgaged before they were even planted, workers fell further and further into debt to the landowners. If sharecropping initially gave black families freedom that work for wages did not, it also tied them to the land in poverty for generations.
Quick Review Consider the early impacts of Reconstruction up to 1877. Would you consider it a success or a failure? Give at least three reasons to support your position.
TERROR, APATHY, AND THE CREATION OF THE SEGREGATED SOUTH
153
Analyze the reasons Reconstruction ended and the impact of Redemption.
During the first decade after the Civil War, Americans witnessed extraordinary changes. Slavery ended, and the Constitution was amended to give former slaves citizenship rights and the same right to vote as whites. Black males voted, held office, and served on juries, and black men, women, and children rode on integrated transit and attended school. Some even managed to own their own land. However, few of the advances of the first decade of Reconstruction lasted.
The rise and decline of black rights was an uneven process. Blacks were organizing and gaining new rights while the Civil War was still being fought. Many whites resisted black political and economic progress throughout Congressional Reconstruction. Although the withdrawal of federal troops in 1877 greatly hastened the process of undoing the gains of Reconstruction, what some white Southerners called “Redemption,” that, too, was uneven. In some areas, white-only government had been reestablished well before 1877, while in other areas, blacks maintained political rights well into the 1880s and 1890s. Nevertheless, eventually, the high hopes of Reconstruction ended everywhere.
Opposition to Black Rights and the Roots of "Redemption"
Opponents of black rights were never completely excluded from power during Reconstruction. In September 1868, the white majority in the Georgia legislature voted to expel all 27 African-American representatives. Henry McNeal Turner, one of the 27, responded: “You may expel us, gentlemen, by your votes today; but while you do it, remember that there is a just God in Heaven.” Two years later, in response to actions like the expulsion of the black legislators, President Grant reinstated military rule in Georgia. Black legislators returned to their seats along with white allies and opponents, and a majority in the legislature ratified the Fifteenth Amendment.
With Grant in the White House and Republican leaders in Congress who were willing to use federal troops if necessary to support the rights of former slaves and their allies, the Republican Party in the South was the party of black rights and racial equality. Blacks, often organized in Union Leagues, were at the heart of the party, but there were also large numbers of white Republicans in the South, including both Southern born and immigrants from the North. Southern whites who supported Republican and multiracial efforts were called scalawags, and they were a diverse lot. Some had
Scalawags
A disparaging term for southern whites who supported the Southern Republican Party during Reconstruction.

Chapter 15 Reconstruction 439
15 J
15 J
Carpetbaggers
Term used by white Southerners for Northern transplants who came to the South to help with Reconstruction.
153
opposed secession from 1861. Others, like Confederate General James Longstreet or army veteran Albert R. Parsons, embraced the Republican Party only after the war. Some, like Parsons, strongly supported equal rights for blacks. For others, support for black rights was secondary, but they saw the party as a place of personal opportunity.
Northern whites who came South were called carpetbaggers because, Southerners said, they could carry everything they owned in a single suitcase covered with carpet-like material. Resentful, Southerners claimed that carpetbaggers had come South to get rich. Carpetbaggers were on the whole younger and less prosperous than the scalawags. Some carpetbaggers were no doubt opportunists, coming to make their fortune, while others were abolitionists, coming South to implement policies they had long advocated. Many were veterans of the Union army, and some like Governor Adelbert Ames, the Republican Governor of Mississippi, had first been ordered South by the army and had stayed on.
In the 1860s and 1870s, there were virtually no black Democrats in the South. The post-Civil War Democratic Party was the party of “white only” government. Southern Democrats organized at every political level from small towns to state legislatures and governors’ offices. Their twofold goal was to assure that, even if blacks were now free, they would have few rights and that whites committed to excluding blacks from power would dominate every aspect of society, politically, economically, and culturally. For these segregationist Democrats, African-Americans of the Union Leagues, scalawags, and carpetbaggers were all their enemies.
Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus Lamar of Mississippi, an example of the Southern Democratic Party leaders of his day, was from an old elite Southern family. He represented Mississippi in the U.S. Congress before the war and became a staunch secessionist. During the war, he was a general in the Confederate army. In the postwar period, he decided to enter politics again. Lamar wrote to a friend, “It does seem to me that if there ever was a time when the white people of this state... should rise & with one unanimous voice protest against the domination about to be piled upon them the present is that time.” He proceeded to do everything he could to ensure white rule in Mississippi.
In November 1872, having long-since secured a presidential pardon, Lamar won a seat in the U.S. Congress. He also helped to organize the Democratic Party in Mississippi. In campaign speeches, Lamar attacked black voting rights. In Congress, he tried to ensure that the federal government did not enforce black rights. He helped defeat the Enforcement Act of 1875, which would have given President Grant more authority to implement the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments in Mississippi. While he was engaged in partisan politics, Lamar also helped to develop another political organization outside of the Democratic Party—hidden from view but essential to his political victory—the Ku Klux Kian.
Ku Klux Kian
One of several vigilante groups that terrorized black people in the South during Reconstruction Era, founded by Confederate veterans in 1866.
The Rise of Violence and the Ku Klux Kian
The Ku Klux Kian was founded as a social club among Confederate veterans in Tennessee in 1866. It quickly turned into the largest of several secret and violent organizations bent on ensuring a reign of terror against not only Republican political leaders of either race but also teachers in black schools and blacks in general. The Kian was committed to ending Reconstruction and returning the South to white rule. The Kian assassinated Arkansas’s Congressman James M. Hinds, members of the South Carolina legislature, and other members of state constitutional conventions. It had only just begun its work.
440 Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
Similar organizations grew across the South. In Louisiana, the Knights of the White Camellia played a similar role, as did the White Line organizations in Mississippi. Although leaders like Lamar maintained a public distance, they secretly kept close ties to these violent extralegal organizations. By political organizing and sheer violence and intimidation, they were confident that they could return the South to its prewar ways.
Even before the emergence of the KKK, African-Americans and their white Republican allies faced violence. Just after the war’s end in May 1866, a bloody riot in Memphis, Tennessee, which began when two carriages, one driven by a black and one by a white, collided. The riot resulted in the burning of black schools, churches, and over 90 black homes as well as the killing of at least 48 people; all but two of whom were black. A Memphis teacher was murdered, and others were told they would be killed if they did not leave the city immediately. The following fall, only 13 of the 40 teachers in the black schools of Memphis returned. A few weeks later, a similar riot in New Orleans, Louisiana, resulted in at least 100 injuries as well as the killing of 34 blacks and three of their white supporters.
By the spring of 1873, what could only be described as a civil war was going on in Louisiana. Tension mounted after the November 1872 elections in which one group of voters elected a Republican governor and another group, a Democratic one. When a federal judge ruled in favor of the Republican slate, President Grant sent troops to New Orleans to oust the Democratic governor and install the Republican administration. But in the small town of Colfax, Louisiana, two sheriffs had also been elected, and federal troops were a long way off. On Easter Sunday, April 13,
1873, tensions reached a boiling point. Several dozen black families along with William Ward, who was the Republican sheriff as well as a former slave and Union army veteran, barricaded themselves inside the town and sent urgent telegrams to the governor in New Orleans, asking for the army to rescue them. Help was too late in coming. Two to three hundred whites marched on the town, led by the Democratic sheriff, Confederate veteran Christopher Columbus Nash. Nash and his army attacked the town and killed everyone they could find. At least 60 blacks, perhaps many more, were killed. The next day, witnesses saw only piles of bodies everywhere. Colfax was far from an isolated incident.
Some of the greatest violence was in Mississippi. On July 4,1874, as the Republican Party held a meeting in Vicksburg, Mississippi, armed whites arrived and shot and killed many of those, white and black, in attendance. Peter Crosby, the sheriff in Vicksburg, demanded federal intervention, but did not get help. On September 1, 1875, at a Republican meeting in Yazoo City, Henry Dixon began shooting at the mixed-race gathering. One person was killed instantly. Before long, those who were at the meeting scattered and a company of organized Mississippi White Liners—the Mississippi version of the Kian—took over the town and forced its elected government to flee.
On Election Day, the Democrats won statewide in Mississippi. In Port Gibson, black voters arriving at the polls were met by some 80 whites armed with Remington rifles, who started firing at them. One old man, John Morris, was killed, six others wounded, and none voted. At Peytona, not a single Republican vote was cast.
Kian members quickly adopted hoods and masks both to hide their identity and to frighten those who opposed them.



Chapter 15 Reconstruction 441
The Memphis riot was but one of many in which whites, enraged by new black rights, attacked homes, schools, and churches belonging to newly free blacks and any whites who supported them.
Democratic sentries on the Tombigbee River ensured that black voters could not cross the river to get to polling places. Governor Ames fled for his life before his term ended, while Democratic Party teams warned politically active Republicans, black and white, to leave the state before they were killed. Reconstruction ended in Mississippi with the 1875 elections.
Efforts to Defend Reconstruction
The antiblack, anti-Republican violence with which the South was slowly “redeemed” from Reconstruction met resistance at every step, sometimes very significant resistance. In March of 1870, just as the Fifteenth Amendment was ratified, Congress also passed the first Enforcement Act, making the denial of the right to vote because of race through force, fraud, bribery, or intimidation a federal crime. Up to that time, protecting voting rights had been completely a state issue, but in 1870, Congress had significant reasons not to trust that all the states would protect voting rights, especially for newly enfranchised African-Americans. Two further Enforcement Acts gave the federal government the right to intervene when elections were unfair. In addition, the Ku Klux Kian Act of April 1871 made conspiracies to deprive citizens of the right to vote a punishable federal offense. In June 1870, Congress also created the U.S. Department of Justice with a specific mandate to enforce Reconstruction. (Up until then, the U.S. Attorney General had been a kind of in-house lawyer and legal advisor to the president and cabinet but with no agency to lead.) All of these acts
ct V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
represented a major expansion of federal power. Because of the new legislation, crimes against individuals could, for the first time, be prosecuted by the federal government, especially if state governments did not step in and do their duty
President Grant used this legislation forcefully. In October 1871, the president proclaimed nine counties of South Carolina to be in a 'condition of lawlessness” and sent federal troops to restore order and arrest several hundred Kian leaders, some of whom ended up serving terms in federal prison. In addition, perhaps 2,000 Kian members left the state. Seven hundred leaders of the Kian were also arrested in Mississippi and several hundred more in North Carolina. By the end of 1872, the Kian, as an organization, had been destroyed.
Ihe Kian would rise again, but not for many decades later. Nevertheless, despite its absence, violence against blacks and their white Republican allies continued in the 1870s. In the North, people were growing more and more willing to let the South settle its own affairs. When the Democrats nominated newspaper editor Horace Greeley for president in 1872, they adopted a platform attacking Republican corruption and calling for civil service reform while also promising a general amnesty for former Confederates and an end to federal intervention in the South. Grant was easily renominated by the Republicans and won the election handily, but Democrats gained power in Congress. As it turned out, Greeley died before the electoral votes were counted, which caused some confusion, but no one doubted that Grant had won the election. In his inaugural address at the beginning of his second term in March 1873, Grant told the nation, “The effects of the late civil strife have been to free the slave and make him a citizen. Yet he is not possessed of the civil rights which citizenship should carry with it. This is wrong, and should be corrected. To this correction I stand committed, so far as Executive influence can avail.” Grant did his best, but it was not enough.
In 1875, Grant sent fellow Civil War General Philip Sheridan to Louisiana to investigate the political violence. Sheridan documented the killing of 2,141 blacks and the wounding of 2,115 more since the war had ended. All of these crimes remained unpunished. Another Civil War veteran, former slave Henry Adams, organized a committee of 500 blacks to “look into affairs and see the true condition of our race.” In northern Louisiana around the Red River area alone, the committee documented 683 murders, including the following notations:
Sam Maybury, whipped to death, December 1865 Henry West, badly whipped, November 1874 George, a colored man, killed by white men 1873 Nancy Brooks, badly whipped by a white man, 1873
In most cases, the list included the name of the victim and the unpunished killer. The reality that Sheridan and Adams documented would not change for a very long time.
A
Changing National Mood and the End of Reconstruction A number of factors led to the growing national weariness with federal intervention in the South. Southern Reconstruction governments were regularly accused of corruption, and some office holders, black and white, certainly enriched themselves. P.B.S. Pinchback of Louisiana, the only black governor in the Reconstruction-era, admitted that he made considerable profit for himself in his political career. South Carolina’s
white Republican Governor Robert K. Scott speculated in state bonds, and North Carolina’s Governor William Holden was aware of “damnable rascality.” In truth, the Reconstruction governments were probably no more corrupt than those that came before or after, but the charges tarnished Reconstruction.
The Grant administration also faced one corruption scandal after another. During Grant’s first year in office, Jay Gould and James Fisk, the nation’s leading bankers, tried to corner the nation’s gold supply and thus control the economy, with possible support from administration insiders including Julia Grant, the president’s wife. One after another, cabinet officers resigned and were replaced after they were charged with taking bribes or other forms of corruption. In 1870, former Ohio Governor Jacob Cox resigned as secretary of the interior to protest the administration’s failure to implement civil service reform. In perhaps the biggest scandal, a congressional investigation uncovered the workings of the so-called Whiskey Ring, a group including elected officials, government employees, and whiskey makers who defrauded the U.S. Treasury of excise taxes on whiskey. Over 200 distillers and revenue agents were indicted, and Grant’s personal secretary, Orville E. Babcock, resigned. Grant directed the investigations to continue saying, “Let no guilty man escape if it can be avoided,” and he ordered the Attorney General not to grant immunity to any suspects, but he was seriously tarnished by the widespread corruption.
The sheer size of the federal interventions in the South also undermined public support. In late 1874, White League militants ousted the Republican governor, William P. Kellogg, in Louisiana and took over the legislative hall. Since Louisiana was still under military supervision, Grant ordered General Sheridan to restore order. With 5,000 U.S. Army troops, Sheridan restored Kellogg to the governor’s office and forcibly removed Democrats from the legislative hall. The spectacle of U.S. Army soldiers marching into a legislative chamber and removing people who claimed to have been elected created a huge backlash. Newspapers that had supported the Union cause now compared the White League to the founding fathers defending their freedom from the tyranny of the British.
Debates in Congress reflected the change in Northern public opinion and the increasing swagger of Southern leaders. Joseph R. Hawley, a Connecticut Republican who called himself a “radical abolitionist,” nevertheless argued that the “social, and educational, and moral reconstruction,” of the South could “never come from any legislative halls.” The Democrats in Congress praised “local self-government,” while insisting that black and white Republicans in the South should stop depending “upon external aid.” In that context, it was difficult for the federal administration or the U.S. Army officers in the South to get support.
The U.S. Supreme Court was not sympathetic to Reconstruction. In the Slaughterhouse Cases of 1873, the court severely restricted the reach of the Fourteenth Amendment. A group of butchers in New Orleans had challenged the right of the Louisiana legislature to grant a monopoly to one meatpacking company because, they said, it violated their Fourteenth Amendment rights to due process of law and citizenship rights. But the court ruled that the Fourteenth Amendment did not include such rights, making it much harder to bring other suits about state infringement of citizen’s rights.
In March 1876, the courts decision in United States v. Cruikshank struck a further blow to Reconstruction. William J. “Bill” Cruikshank was a white participant in the
Part V Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
attack on Colfax, Louisiana, in 1873. He was indicted on federal charges for violating the civil rights of blacks who were killed in the attack. But 3 years later, the Supreme Court ruled that the charges were unconstitutional. Chief Justice Morrison R. Waite wrote that protecting the rights of individual citizens was a state, not a federal duty. Cruikshank took away one of the federal government’s most important enforcement powers—the right to bring federal charges against those who attacked the basic rights of African-Americans.
Finally, in 1883, the court ruled that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 was unconstitutional because the Fourteenth Amendment gave Congress only the right to outlaw state government actions, not discrimination by individuals, which the court left to the states to deal with. The legal foundation of Reconstruction seemed to be crumbling or, perhaps, the court was simply following public opinion. Associate Justice Samuel Miller, a Grant appointee, wrote to a friend, describing what many Americans were also feeling, “I am losing interest in these matters.”
As the country prepared for the 1876 presidential elections, the loss of interest in Reconstruction was evident. The Republicans nominated Ohio Governor Rutherford B. Hayes, who was on good terms with all factions in the party and especially popular with some because of his crackdown on nascent labor unions in Ohio. The platform said surprisingly little about Reconstruction. The Democrats nominated New York Governor Samuel Tilden, who had made a fortune as legal counsel for some of the country’s richest bankers and railroads and gained fame for fighting corruption in government. Promising to continue the fight against corruption and foster prosperity, and never mentioning Reconstruction, Tilden was the strongest candidate the Democrats had nominated in some time.
The campaign was intense, especially in the South where violence and confusion reigned. In November, Tilden outpolled Hayes, winning the popular vote 4,286,808 to 4,034,142, but it was the electoral votes that counted. In three states, Florida, Louisiana, and South Carolina, Republican election boards discarded enough votes to declare Hayes the winner, which meant that he would also win the electoral count. Not surprisingly, the Democrats challenged these decisions.
The months between the election and the inauguration were as tense as any since the Jefferson-Adams contest of 1800. Some Democrats vowed “Tilden or War.” Congress created an Electoral Commission of 10 congressional representatives, five from each party plus five Supreme Court justices, to determine the outcome since the Constitution gave no guidance beyond saying that the votes “shall be counted” in the Senate. After intense negotiations, the Electoral Commission ruled 8 to 7 for Hayes. But the Constitution specified that a president could not be declared elected until the Senate actually counted the votes cast by the presidential electors from the various states. Democrats refused to convene the Senate to count that vote, thus making it impossible to resolve the crisis. Finally on February 26, a group of Southern Democrats met with Ohio Republicans and negotiated a compromise. Hayes, who promised to treat the South with “kind consideration,” agreed that, if he were made President, he would use his power to end Reconstruction, most of all by withdrawing the federal troops that were in the South protecting Republican governments. The Southern Democrats liked the offer and agreed to let the Senate meet and count the votes including—following the Electoral Commission’s recommendation—the votes of the Republican electors from Florida. On Inauguration Day, March 4, 1877, Hayes became president and moved quickly to fulfill his promises.
152
152
15.3
Jim Crow segregation
Segregation laws that became widespread in the South during the 1890s, named for a minstrel show character portrayed satirically by white actors in blackface.
Southern Republicans who had supported Hayes were outraged. A former slave from South Carolina commented angrily, “To think that Hayes could go back on us when we had to wade through blood to help place him where he is now.” Little could now be done, however. Hayes did not immediately remove federal troops from the South, but he made it clear that the troops who remained would not intervene in the South’s internal matters as Grant had ordered. The changes in federal policy had been coming for some time, but after March 1877, there was little reason to expect any federal support for Reconstruction anywhere.
After 1877, the direction was clear. John C. Calhoun, an Arkansas planter and grandson of the South Carolina senator of the same name, told Congress that “left to ourselves,” the white South could settle “all questions” about the region’s political arrangements. And they did. Blacks, carpetbaggers, and scalawags were slowly excluded from offices, though some stayed on into the 1890s. Many were forced to leave the South altogether if they wanted long lives. In addition, blacks were excluded from voting altogether, education budgets were slashed, and the regulation of share-cropping shifted further in favor of plantation owners. After 1877, white rule in the South was assured.
The Birth of the Segregated South
Disenfranchisement and segregation did not happen overnight. African-Americans were still being elected to office in the 1880s and 1890s. George H. White of North Carolina, who was described as “the last of the Negro congressmen,” bade a final farewell to the House of Representatives in 1901 saying: “This, Mr. Chairman, this is perhaps the Negroes' temporary farewell to the American Congress. But let me say, phoenix-like, he will rise up someday and come again.” The absence of blacks from Congress lasted for 28 years until Oscar De Priest was elected from Chicago. Only after another civil rights movement many decades later did African-Americans reach the number of representatives in Congress that they had in the 1870s.
Various forms of what came to be called Jim Crow segregation developed at a rapid pace. (Jim Crow was a derogatory character in a minstrel show designed to denigrate blacks, but his name has been applied to the whole era of rigid racial segregation that was the rule in many parts of the United States from the 1870s to the 1960s.) Schools, public facilities, transportation, and most every other aspect of life were segregated. In addition to losing the vote, blacks were marginalized economically so that sharecropping became virtually the only option for most. A vicious campaign of lynching controlled blacks through fear and intimidation. Perhaps the capstone of this segregation was the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson decision that separate by equal” facilities were quite acceptable under the United States Constitution. By the time that decision was issued, the high hopes of Reconstruction were a dim memory and most Americans—white and black—were living in a very different world.
153
Quick Review Considering the events and trends of the later years of Reconstruction, or Redemption as it was called, who were the winners and who were the losers? Who was most responsible for what happened?
PartV Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877
CONCLUSION
During the 12 years after the Civil War, Americans grappled with what the future held for newly freed slaves and how best to return to the Union those states that had been in rebellion during the Civil War. The so-called Radical Republicans in Congress sought ways to protect the educational, political, and economic rights of the freedmen—as former slaves, male and female, were called. Andrew Johnson, who became president upon Lincoln’s death in April 1865, seemed indifferent to African-American rights and soon alienated congressional radicals by restoring power to former rebels intent on limiting the freedoms of former slaves.
Congressional Republicans had their own plans for consolidating the Union victory, however, and eventually, the House of Representatives impeached Johnson for obstructing its plans to reconstruct the South. Although he was acquitted of “high crimes and misdemeanors” by the Senate, which allowed him to stay in office, Johnson’s political career was over. But Congress passed a number of laws, including the 1866 Civil Rights Act and the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution, designed to protect black rights as citizens and voters. Across the South, African-Americans and whites committed to Reconstruction were elected to local and national office in larger numbers and began to reshape their states. In 1868, Ulysses S. Grant, the Republican nominee, was elected president. Grant was committed to the Reconstruction of the South in ways that would protect black rights, especially black voting rights.
After the war, African-Americans pursued full citizenship rights, education, and economic independence. Terrorized by white supremacists and lacking money and credit, most African-Americans never achieved either true equality or independence. At the same time, white veterans of the Confederate army were organizing to deny those rights, not only legally through the Democratic Party but also illegally through the Ku Klux Kian and other similar organizations. As time passed, and as public support for federal intervention in the affairs of the South eroded, the promise of Reconstruction’s early days evaporated. By 1877, a new president, Rutherford B. Hayes, began to bring Reconstruction to an end, assuring white rule in the South and the disenfranchisement and “Jim Crow segregation” of African-Americans for generations to come.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
Why might the historian Eric Foner call Reconstruction "America's Unfinished Revolution"?
Chapter 15 Reconstruction 447
Chapter 15 Chapter Review
FEDERAL RECONSTRUCTION POLICY
Explain the political development of federal Reconstruction policy.
Review Questions
1.	Historical Interpretation
What do Johnson’s policies before his impeachment tell us about his vision of the post-Reconstruction South?
2.	Constructing Arguments
How would you explain the increasingly radical nature of Congressional Reconstruction? What factors pushed Congress toward more aggressive intervention in Southern society and politics?
3.	Comparison
Compare and contrast Presidential Reconstruction and Congressional Reconstruction. What were some of the ways that Congress forced the states of the former Confederacy to accept Reconstruction that Johnson opposed?
THE IMPACT OF RECONSTRUCTION
Explain the impact of Reconstruction on African-American life in the South.
Review Questions
4.	Historical Interpretation
What aspects of the history of the 1860s and 1870s would a historian report to emphasize the success of Congressional Reconstruction? What aspects of those years would a historian report to emphasize Congressional Reconstruction as a failure?
5.	Contextualization
Why did newly freed slaves place such a high priority on education?
6.	Constructing Arguments
Defend or refute the following statement. “By the end of the 1870s, from an economic perspective, most Southern blacks were almost as closely tied to the land and dependent on white landowners as they had been under slavery.” What evidence can you produce to support your position?
TERROR, APATHY, AND THE CREATION OF THE SEGREGATED SOUTH_____________________________________
Analyze the reasons Reconstruction ended and the impact of Redemption.
Review Questions
7.	Contextualization
What groups made up the Republican coalition during Reconstruction? What did each group hope to gain from its support of the party?
8.	Historical Interpretation
Is it fair to describe the Democratic Party during Reconstruction as the party of white supremacy? Why or why not?
9.	Constructing Arguments
Defend or refute the following statement. “The Ku Klux Kian of the Reconstruction era was, at its essence, a terrorist organization.”
15.3
V
Expansion, Separation, and a New Union, 1844-1877 Becoming an Industrial Worl Power—Costs Benefits, and Response
1865-1914
PART OUTLINE
