Chapter 29 A New World On
While Gorbachev and Bush got to know each other, Gorbachev s own hold on power weakened. Hardliners within the Kremlin blamed Gorbachev for weak leadership as Soviet control of eastern Europe ended. In August 1991, old-line communists staged a military coup and arrested Gorbachev. Boris Yeltsin, the president of the Russian Republic, the largest and most powerful of the 15 Soviet Republics that made up the Soviet Union (or Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the U.S.S.R.), helped defeat the coup leaders, and Gorbachev was freed and restored to power within days. However, the restoration was short-lived. In December 1991, Gorbachev announced that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (the Soviet Union), which had governed Russia and its neighbors since 1917, was no more. Russia, the Ukraine, and Belarus created an informal Confederation of Independent States. Other former Soviet Republics savored their independence. Gorbachev’s position simply disappeared. At the Kremlin, the red hammer and sickle flag was replaced with the blue flag of the Russian Republic. The prime enemy of the United States through 45 years of Cold War was gone. While relations with Russia and the other former Soviet republics would be difficult at times, they took place in a vastly different world, (see Map 29-1).
MAP 29-1 Europe After Communism. The map of Europe was radically rearranged after the Soviet Union broke apart into independent republics and the nations of eastern Europe claimed their independence from Russian domination.
840 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
While Eastern Europe went through its dramatic changes, the other Communist giant, China, was also changing. As a former ambassador to China, Bush thought he knew the country well and wanted to build closer ties. But he was taken by complete surprise in the spring of 1989, when Chinese students gathered in Tiananmen Square in the heart of China s capital, Beijing, to protest the communist party’s tight hold and to demand more democratic governance and greater individual freedom. Such protests were unheard of in Communist China. By May, as protests had spread to 200 other Chinese cities, the government declared martial law, and then in June sent tanks and army units into Tiananmen Square, killing perhaps 3,000 students and injuring three times as many. The communist government of China was not about to follow Russia’s peaceful transition to a different social system. The world, including President Bush, was horrified. For the rest of his term, Bush was torn about whether to join other nations in protest, seek to maintain and expand commercial ties with China, and respond to protests by members of Congress and the 43,000 Chinese students who were in the United States. The result was an unclear and inconsistent China policy.
In August 1990, the Bush foreign policy team was confronted by another surprising crisis in yet another part of the world. On August 1, Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein ordered an attack on Iraq’s smaller neighbor, Kuwait, and quickly took control of the country. Kuwait had been part of Iraq until 1961, and Hussein insisted he was simply reuniting what should never have been divided. U.S. ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, had told Hussein that the United States had “no opinion,” on Iraq’s border dispute with Kuwait, but she never meant that statement to mean the United States would allow Iraq to swallow its neighbor. Both Iraq and Kuwait were among the world’s largest oil producers, and Iraqi control of Kuwait meant that an Iraqi dictator, whom the United States did not trust, was in control of 20 percent of the world’s oil.
Tiananmen Square
Prodemocracy demonstrations involving thousands of young Chinese students.
w
ELCOME TO KUWAIT



^XXZearly !991, U.S. troops landed In Kuwait and quickly secured its independence from Iraq.
Chapter 29 A New World Ordj
29.1
Operation Desert Storm
Code name for the successful offensive against Iraq by the United States and its allies in the 1991 Persian Gulf War.
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
Agreement reached in 1993 by Canada, Mexico, and the United States to substantially reduce barriers to trade.
Bush announced, “This will not stand.” The United States negotiated with Hussein but quickly began military planning if negotiations failed. Bush gained the support of Syria, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia in insisting that Iraq must leave Kuwait. In November, the UN Security Council authorized the use of force if negotiations did not succeed. While there was significant opposition in the United States to any intervention, Congress authorized the use of force, though in the Senate the vote was a close 52-47.
On January 17, 1991, the U.S.-led Operation Desert Storm began. An air war showered missiles and bombs on the Iraqi forces in Kuwait and destroyed communications and electrical systems in Iraq. On February 24, U.S. Marines from bases in Saudi Arabia landed in Kuwait and in 100 hours of battle drove the Iraqi forces out of the country. Kuwait was reestablished as an independent country and a close U.S. ally. Fearing unnecessary carnage and not wanting a U.S. occupation of Iraq proper, Bush then halted all military operations. The war was over. It seemed an easy military victory, but it was not without costs.
Within Iraq, rebellions broke out against Hussein’s rule. While Bush hoped they would succeed, he was not willing to intervene or to try to topple Hussein, fearing that the United States would be caught in a long-term land war in Iraq. He did, however, take action to protect the Kurdish minority in a new autonomous region within northern Iraq, announcing a “no fly zone” in which the United States would shoot down any Iraqi planes over that area, but opposition forces in the rest of the country, expecting U.S. aid that never came, were slaughtered by Hussein’s troops. A U.S. boycott of Iraq led to widespread suffering within the country. Finally, the staging of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia, site of the holiest places in the Muslim world, stirred anger among devout Muslims who hated the idea of non-Muslims in that region. Among those who were angry was Osama bin Laden, a Saudi who founded al-Qaeda, a terrorist organization, to retaliate against both Saudi Arabia and the United States.
Meanwhile, closer to home, Bush decided in December 1989 that Panama’s dictator, Manuel Noriega, had to be removed. Noriega had received CIA support to oppose Communists in the region, but he had also become rich through drug trafficking and had become a brutal dictator. When his party lost a presidential election in May 1989, Noriega annulled the election. Knowing that the Carter-era treaty meant that the Panama Canal was going to be returned to Panama, Bush took no chances. On December 20, a U.S. assault team landed in Panama and took control of the country. They restored the democratically elected president of Panama, Guillermo Endara, and eventually arrested Noriega as a drug dealer and imprisoned him in Florida.
The Bush team also made other international efforts that had mixed results. The administration negotiated a North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) that would eliminate tariffs between the United States and Canada and Mexico, but Senate confirmation of the treaty was slow in coming. Into Somalia, a nation in northeast Africa threatened by famine and chaos, the United States sent 28,000 peacekeeping troops, but could not effect large-scale changes. To the surprise of many of its own citizens, Yugoslavia, which had been relatively stable since the end of World War II, disintegrated into ethnic hostility between its Eastern Orthodox Serbian, Roman Catholic Croatian, and Bosnian Muslim communities. In response to the new crisis in Yugoslavia, the United States supported a UN peacekeeping mission, which was ineffective, and an arms embargo. Even with the Cold War over, the world remained a confusing and dangerous place.
Education, Legislation, and the Supreme Court
In his inaugural address, George Bush angered the outgoing Ronald Reagan by saying that it was time “to make kinder the face of the Nation and gentler the face of the world. He also continued the Reagan assault on big government, insisting
842 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
that the new kindness must come from a “thousand points of light,” emerging from local nongovernmental groups around the country rather than from federal government programs.
Bush called himself an “education president.” Where Reagan sought to abolish the Department of Education and reduce the federal government’s role in education, Bush convened the nation s governors at an “Education Summit” in Charlottesville, Virginia, in the fall of 1989 to address the challenges in American public schools. The plan that emerged from Bush’s partnership with the governors, who were led by Arkansas governor Bill Clinton, was called America 2000. It sought to improve the nation s schools by setting new national standards for all students.
Bush also focused efforts on two other pieces of legislation that would have far-reaching results. He supported the Clean Air Act that toughened air quality standards and pollution controls. It would effect huge changes in industry and begin to shift more attention to environmental issues. He also led the fight for the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) that passed Congress in 1990. The ADA outlawed discrimination in employment, public services, and public accommodations for people with disabilities. It not only transformed the face of American buildings that now had to provide wheelchair ramps, elevators, and appropriate lavatories for those with physical disabilities, but also put in motion pervasive changes in hiring practices and services that would benefit all those with disabilities, including those who were deaf and blind.
Bush’s first appointment to the Supreme Court, David Souter, drew little controversy. Souter turned out to be a more liberal judge than many expected, probably including Bush, especially when he voted to affirm the court’s Roe v. Wade decision in 1992. When Thurgood Marshall retired, Bush stirred considerable controversy by nominating Clarence Thomas. Thomas, like Marshall, was an African-American, but while Marshall had been known as “Mr. Civil Rights” and was probably the most liberal member of the court in many years, Thomas was known as an unusually conservative Republican. In his confirmation hearings, Thomas was accused of sexual harassment by
Anita Hill, a black law professor and former member of Thomas’s staff.
Hill offered explicit testimony as to what Thomas had said and done, which was highly embarrassing to Thomas and his supporters. Hill was attacked in turn by conservatives, and Thomas called the assault a “high-tech lynching for uppity blacks,” but when he was confirmed by the narrowest of Senate votes, 52 to 48, many women concluded that the male senators did not take sexual harassment seriously. While Thomas took his seat on the court, more women ran for and won elective office the following year than in any previous time, increasing their numbers in the Senate, the House, and state legislatures.
Race: From Rodney King to O.J. Simpson
In March 1991, Rodney King, an African-American, failed to stop for police on the Foothill Freeway near San Fernando, California. Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) officers gave chase for 8 miles and finally arrested King. When King resisted arrest, four police officers beat him as he lay on the ground. A nearby resident used a home video camera to record the arrest and beating, and the video was quickly distributed around the nation. People were outraged.
Although King had resisted arrest, the officers had clearly continued to beat him long after he was subdued.
The four officers on the video were arrested. Their attorneys argued that they could not get a fair trial in Los Angeles and the trial was moved to mostly rural Simi County, California. The result of the move was that the officers faced an all-white jury, unlikely in Los Angeles County. In April 1992, the jury found three of the officers
Clean Air Act
Passed by Congress in 1990 as amendments to an earlier act, required substantial restrictions on air pollution.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
Legislation that significantly improved options for people with disabilities.
The Supreme Court's 1973 Roe v. Wade decision, stating that the right to privacy guaranteed in the Constitution protects a woman's right to choose an abortion, remained controversial and impacted American / politics for decades to come, most of all in terms of the appointment every new Supreme Court justice.


not guilty and deadlocked on the fourth. The acquittal released pent-up anger in the black community in Los Angeles. Riots lasting 4 days resulted in 53 deaths, 2,300 injuries, and $1 billion in property damage. Black and Latino rioters targeted whites and Asians in their neighborhoods, perhaps especially Korean storeowners. A video from the riot showed a white truck driver being pulled out of his cab and beaten. Only the intervention of other blacks who got the driver to a hospital saved his life. For many, the arrest of King, the trial, and the riot that followed illustrated just how deeply lines were still drawn between races in the United States in the 1990s.
While the events around King got the headlines, scholars and activists debated the state of race relations. Some observed that despite what happened, much had changed since the 1950s when blacks were legally barred from white schools, white bus seats, and all-white polling places in many places. Orlando Patterson, a Harvard sociologist, wrote “Relations between ordinary Afro-Americans and Euro-Americans are, in fact, the best they have ever been, although still far from ideal.” Other scholars were less sure, noting that events like the beating of Rodney King and data about the educational experience of many black and Latino students confirmed that much had not changed. Andrew Hacker wrote that “A huge racial chasm remains, and there are few signs that the coming century will see it closed.”
In 1994, another crisis illustrated the depth of the racial divide in the United States. O.J. Simpson, a celebrated African-American Hall of Fame former football star, was arrested in June after his divorced wife, Nicole Brown, who was white, and her white friend, Ron Goldman, were found stabbed to death just outside her condominium in an exclusive neighborhood of Los Angeles. When the police issued a warrant for Simpson’s arrest, he and a friend fled in Simpson’s white Bronco down the Artesia Freeway while perhaps 100,000 Americans watched on TV. Simpson eventually surrendered, and his trial continued for most of the next year. The evidence against Simpson seemed strong, but black and white Americans saw it differently. In one poll, 63 percent of whites thought he would get a fair trial while 69 percent of blacks thought he would not. The trial was a media circus. Simpson’s lead attorney, Johnnie Cochran, a tough African-American trial lawyer, proved that the investigation of Simpson by the Los Angeles police was filled with racist assumptions, although he did not prove Simpson’s innocence. When in October 1995 a jury acquitted Simpson of the murder charge, a majority of blacks agreed with the verdict, and celebrations broke out in black communities, while most whites were stunned. Regardless of whoever killed Brown and Goldman, the Simpson trial showed that Americans of different races were deeply divided in how they viewed the criminal justice system in the 1990s.
Economic Troubles and the Election of 1992
Bush’s greatest political failure was his inability to manage the U.S. economy. After 1990, the economy went into a serious recession. During 1991 and 1992, AT&T fired 100,000 workers, GM fired 74,000, and two major airlines, Pan Am and Eastern, went bankrupt, throwing more out of work. People blamed the president. With his preoccupation with foreign policy, Bush seemed out of touch, a perception that did not help his political standing.
Bush’s economic problems became an even worse political liability when he decided, in the face of the rapidly increasing government debt, that he needed to raise taxes in spite of his promise not to do so. When the top tax bracket was increased from 28 to 31.5 percent, the New York Post headline said, “Read my lips: I Lied.” Conservative Republicans never forgave Bush.
With the Republican Party in not-quite-open revolt and the nation’s economy in trouble, Democrats smelled victory in the 1992 election. Arkansas governor Bill Clinton soon emerged as a Democratic front-runner. When Clinton lost the New Hampshire primary, he called himself the “comeback kid,” and campaigned harder than ever. Clinton demonstrated a combination of strengths and of weaknesses.
844 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
29.1
President Bush, future president Clinton, and independent candidate Ross Perot debated in the lively 1992 presidential campaign.
He was brilliant. Even though he grew up in poverty, he excelled in school and won scholarships to Georgetown University, was awarded a Rhodes scholarship to Oxford, and then went on to Yale Law School. At Yale, he also met and married fellow student Hillary Rodham. He was as charismatic on the campaign trail as John F. Kennedy had been. As one of the founders of the Democratic Leadership Council, he was a moderate who distanced himself from his party’s more liberal members. Clinton also had his weaknesses. The explanations he gave for his rumored womanizing, draft dodging, and one-time marijuana smoking were never convincing and he earned the name “Slick Willie.” But he was a tough campaigner who would not quit. He won the Democratic nomination, asked Tennessee senator Al Gore, a fellow baby boomer, to be his running mate, and in spite of a personally chaotic style, kept his campaign focused. A sign in the Clinton campaign headquarters reading “It’s the economy, stupid.” said it all.
An independent candidate also entered the race, eccentric billionaire H. Ross Perot. Perot described the deficit as being “like a crazy aunt we keep down in the basement. All the neighbors know she’s there but nobody wants to talk about her.” He said that Bush’s NAFTA Treaty would produce a “giant sucking sound” of American jobs leaving the country. Although given virtually no chance of winning, Perot was the most popular third-party candidate in many years.
Bush was challenged for the Republican nomination by conservative commentator Pat Buchanan, known as the “pit bull of the Right.” Bush easily defeated Buchanan for the nomination, but the attack weakened the president. The conservative dominance of the 1992 Republican convention, especially the vocal role of religious conservatives like Buchanan, alienated many more moderate voters. Throughout the fall campaign, the president seemed disengaged. It was not a close contest. Clinton won almost 45 million votes to Bush’s 39 million. Surprisingly, Perot won almost 20 million votes, hurting Bush more than Clinton. Democrats retained control of the Senate 57 to 43 and the House 258 to 176.
29J
Quick Review How did George H.W. Bush's foreign policy concerns evolve over the course of his presidency?
Chapter 29 A New World On
THE CLINTON PRESIDENCY

2M
29.2
Analyze the impact of the Clinton presidency and the Clinton-Gingrich conflict on the country.
Clinton came to office with high hopes. He idolized John F. Kennedy and wanted to be remembered as another Kennedy. Clinton, the first baby boomer president, replaced Bush, the last of eight presidents who had served in World War II. He saw his coming to office as a generational change and told the country, “Today, a generation raised in the shadows of the Cold War assumes new responsibilities.” He set an activist agenda, saying, “We must invest more in our own people, in their jobs, in their future, and at the same time cut our massive debt.” Clinton did cut the federal deficit, dramatically. Success on other fronts, however, was more elusive.
29.2
First Lady Hilary Rodham Clinton took an unusually active policy role, leading the task force to create health care legislation in 1994.
The Early Clinton Agenda: It's Still—Mostly—the Economy
Clinton knew he owed his election to the poor state of the nations economy. Clinton also knew that he would be reelected in 1996 only if the economic picture brightened. Having campaigned as a moderate Democrat, he surprised many when he made health care reform his first major policy initiative. Clinton, however, was convinced that reforming the nations chaotic health insurance system would provide a significant jolt to the economy and that providing insurance for the 35 million Americans who had no insurance would help close the growing gap between rich and poor.
In spite of personal tensions in their marriage, Bill and Hillary Clinton were an especially close political team, sometimes compared to Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. The president appointed his wife, along with trusted associate Ira Magaziner, to lead a task force to redesign the nation’s health care system. Unfortunately, the Clinton-Magaziner team made two significant errors. First, their final 1,342-page report was too long and far too complicated. Second, while they consulted hundreds of experts in developing the report, they failed to consult with Congress. In 1993, Clinton said, “If I don’t get health care, I’ll wish I didn’t run for President.” In the end, he did not get it. Conservatives in the Republican minority, led by Congressman Newt Gingrich from Georgia, attacked the plan from the day it was announced. Representatives of physicians and the insurance industry attacked the plan with TV ads and heavily financed congressional lobbying. Without strong support from a large segment of the population or the Democratic majority in Congress, the plan was doomed. In August 1994, the president announced that he was dropping the plan. It had not yet reached a single vote in Congress, but the probable outcome had become clear.
Other issues also got in the way of what Clinton wanted to accomplish. When Clinton tried to fire long-time staff members of the White House travel office for alleged improprieties, he was blocked and accused of trying to give those jobs to friends. When he tried to fulfill a campaign promise to end the ban on gay men and lesbians serving in the armed forces, he was blocked again. The resulting compromise of “Don’t ask, don’t tell,” in which officers would not ask about sexual orientation and soldiers and sailors would keep their sexual orientation hidden or face discharge, satisfied no one.
Only weeks into the new presidency, Clinton’s administration had to handle the fallout from an unexpected confrontation in Texas. In Waco, Texas, cult members led by David Koresh had blockaded themselves in their group’s compound. A gun battle with agents of the FBI and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms on February 28 led to a 7-week stand-off. When the FBI became convinced that children in the compound were being abused, they attacked. Koresh ordered the compound burned, and he and more than 80 of his followers, including 21 children, were killed. It was a horrible outcome that brought significant criticism of the administration and especially of Janet Reno, the new attorney general who had approved the raid, though few knew what could have been a good outcome.
f46 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Clinton had more success on other fronts. Within 2 weeks of taking office, he signed the Family and Medical Leave Act, which Bush had vetoed twice. The law guaranteed up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for family medical emergencies and pregnancy. In his campaign, he had promised to develop a national service plan, and Congress quickly approved Clinton s AmeriCorps, which encouraged volunteerism and promised financial support for college costs to those who gave a year of national service. In September 1994, the first 20,000 AmeriCorps volunteers were sworn in. Congress also authorized $2 billion for Goals 2000, the Clinton version of President Bush’s America 2000 education plan to set national educational standards in core academic subjects. In addition, Congress approved a modest ban on semiautomatic assault weapons and a “Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act” that required antiabortion protesters to keep some distance from medical clinics or places of worship. During his first 2 years, the Senate confirmed two of Clinton’s Supreme Court nominees, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer. With their confirmation, the court’s conservative drift seemed to stop.
In addition, Clinton was convinced that the huge deficit, which had grown substantially under Reagan and Bush, was creating a drag on the American economy. He was also anxious to establish his political credentials as a moderate. In August 1993, less than 7 months into office and with the health care bill still pending, Congress passed Clinton’s first budget. The budget infuriated conservatives because it included a tax increase, and it infuriated liberals because it did little for federal programs. The administration’s goal was simple: balance the federal budget and lower the federal debt. Clinton succeeded, and during his term in office, the total federal spending as a share of the U.S. gross domestic product dropped from 21.5 percent to 19.1 percent. Starting in 1998, real surpluses allowed a major reduction in the federal debt.
Immediately after Clinton’s budget passed Congress, he turned his attention to getting congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which had been negotiated by George Bush. Few gave NAFTA much chance for approval. Labor unions hated the treaty because it proposed to reduce all trade barriers between the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and the unions feared it would cost jobs. Ross Perot had based his third-party campaign on opposition to NAFTA and had succeeded in winning 19 percent of the vote. Nevertheless, Clinton believed that free trade and the development of an unfettered global economy was the key to long-term prosperity. He allied with Republicans in Congress, and against some of his closest Democratic allies, to get the treaty passed, and he signed it in December 1993.
Although Clinton saw himself as a moderate to conservative Democrat, conservative Republicans, especially those in the House of Representatives, did not think he was nearly conservative enough. Clinton also sought to undercut Republican efforts to differentiate themselves from him, which Republicans found utterly frustrating. Under the leadership of a Georgia congressman, Newt Gingrich, working with congressmen Dick Armey and Tom DeLay of Texas, House Republicans planned for the 1994 midterm elections. The House of Representatives had enjoyed a Democratic majority and a Democratic Speaker for 60 of the 64 years between 1930 and 1994. While the Senate and the White House changed hands, the House seemed permanently Democratic. But a new generation of representatives, coming mostly from suburban districts, especially in the South, where there had been few Republicans elected until the 1970s, were determined to create a Republican majority in the Congress and enact their agenda. They were very successful. In November 1994, 34 Democrats were defeated in their bids for reelection, a new Republican majority took control, and Gingrich became the Speaker of the House.
"The Era of Big Government Is Over"
With the new Republican majority and Newt Gingrich as the new speaker coming to power at the end of Clinton’s second year in office, the chance for significant legislative victories for Clinton virtually disappeared. Clinton would spend much of the next 6 years either trying to hold on to past Democratic victories or doing what he and
Goals 2000
Legislation that set tough new goals over the coming decades to improve the quality of American schooling.
Not all Americans supported the NAFTA trade agreement. Many feared it would cost a significant number of jobs in the United States.
Chapter 29 A New World Order
American Voices
Republican Contract with America, 1994
Contests for seats in the U.S. House of Representatives are traditionally local. In the 1994 campaign, however, 337 Republican candidates endorsed a common platform in a dramatic ceremony on the Capitol steps. Their "Contract with America" represented the voice of conservative Americans.
As Republican Members of the House of Representatives and as citizens seeking to join that body we propose not just to change its policies, but even more important, to restore the bonds of trust between the people and their elected representatives....
Thereafter, within the first 100 days of the 104th Congress, we shall bring to the House Floor the following bills, each to be given full and open debate, each to be given a clear and fair vote and each to be immediately available this day for public inspection and scrutiny.
THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY ACT: A
balanced budget/ tax limitation amendment and a legislative line-item veto to restore fiscal responsibility to an out-of-control Congress, requiring them to live under the same budget constraints as families and businesses. THE TAKING BACK OUR STREETS ACT:
An anticrime package including stronger truth-in-sentencing, "good faith" exclusionary rule exemptions, effective death penalty provisions, and cuts in social spending from this summer's "crime" bill to fund prison construction and additional law enforcement to keep people secure in their neighborhoods and kids safe in their schools. THE PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY ACT:
Discourage illegitimacy and teen pregnancy by prohibiting welfare to minor mothers and denying increased AFDC for additional children while on welfare, cut spending for welfare programs, and enact a tough 2-years-and-out provision with work requirements to promote individual responsibility. THE FAMILY REINFORCEMENT ACT:
Child support enforcement, tax incentives for adoption, strengthening rights of parents in their children's education, stronger child pornography laws, and an elderly dependent care tax credit to reinforce the central role of families in American society. THE AMERICAN DREAM RESTORATION ACT: A
$500 per child tax credit, begin repeal of the marriage tax penalty, and creation of American Dream Savings Accounts to provide middle class tax relief. THE NATIONAL SECURITY RESTORATION ACT:
No U.S. troops under U.N. command and restoration of the essential parts of our national security funding to strengthen our national defense and maintain our credibility around the world. THE SENIOR CITIZENS FAIRNESS ACT:
Raise the Social Security earnings limit which currently forces seniors out of the workforce, repeal the 1993 tax hikes on Social Security benefits and provide tax incentives for private long-term care insurance to let older Americans keep more of what they have earned over the years. THE JOB CREATION AND WAGE ENHANCEMENT ACT:
Small business incentives, capital gains cut and indexation, neutral cost recovery, risk assessment/cost-benefit analysis, strengthening the Regulatory Flexibility Act and unfunded mandate reform to create jobs and raise worker wages.
THE COMMON SENSE LEGAL REFORM ACT:
"Loser pays" laws, reasonable limits on punitive damages, and reform of product liability laws to stem the endless tide of litigation. THE CITIZEN LEGISLATURE ACT: A
first-ever vote on term limits to replace career politicians with citizen legislators. Source: Downloaded from, http://www.nationalcenter.org/ContractwithAmerica.html August 2, 2011.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What fundamental principles and assumptions link the 10 initiatives included in the contract?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What does the contract tell you about the political landscape of the 1990s?
To which groups was the contract meant to appeal? Which groups were most likely to find it objectionable?

his closest political advisor, Dick Morris, called “triangulating,” finding a third point between increasingly conservative Republicans and increasingly liberal Democrats to stake out their own position, one that sometimes undercut both.
The biggest battle between the Clinton administration and the Gingrich Republicans came in late 1995, only months into the tenure of the new Congress. After several months of budget battles, Congress passed a budget that included cuts in social programs. Clinton vetoed the budget with the result that the government was briefly without a budget, forcing a partial government shut down for 6 days in
848 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
November. After temporary legislation reopened government offices later that month, the Republican House passed a budget with even further cuts, reducing funds for food stamps, Medicare, and other domestic program. Republican leaders proudly announced, This is a fundamental change in the direction of government.” Clinton again vetoed the budget, and on December 16, the government shut down for 21 days. Federal employees went without their paychecks; national parks and “nonessential” government offices closed. Only in January was a compromise reached that restored most of the cuts. Most political observers thought Clinton had won the battle, painting Gingrich as an extremist and Clinton as a cautious moderate.
In the context of this tense budget debate, Clinton went to Congress in January 1996 to give his annual State of the Union message. He announced, “The era of Big Government is over.” Many Democrats wondered who had really won the budget showdown. Clinton had already promised that one of his major policy goals for 1996 was to put an end to welfare as we know it.” After vetoing more conservative legislation, in August 1996, Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act that replaced the federal government’s long-standing Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program with temporary assistance that prevented most people, except the disabled, from receiving more than 2 years of assistance, with a 5-year lifetime maximum. New York senator Daniel Moynihan called the result, which dropped 2 million black and Latino students from eligibility, the “most brutal act of social policy since Reconstruction.” Fortunately, the economy was experiencing a boom time when the law was passed; the minimum wage was raised, and there were jobs to be found, at least in the short run. The long-time cost to some of the nation’s poorest people was a different matter.
Clinton took other positions that disappointed liberals and heartened conservatives. He signed the Defense of Marriage Act, which said no state was required to recognize a same-sex marriage from another state. Since no state yet allowed same-sex marriage when the law passed, it was a symbolic move, but for gay and lesbian voters who had supported Clinton, it was a frustrating limitation that would have a greater impact in future years.
In spite of the Republican gains in the 1994 elections, the 1996 presidential election was seldom in doubt. The Republicans nominated conservative Senator Robert Dole, a decorated World War II hero and a long-time Washington insider who preferred compromise to Gingrich-style conflict. Dole had a good sense of humor but was not a strong campaigner. Clinton adopted many Republican issues and campaigned energetically. Clinton’s fundraising ability meant that the two parties were closely matched in available funds, where previously, Republicans had traditionally outspent Democrats by a two-to-one margin. Perot again ran as an outsider. Clinton won 49 percent of the vote to Dole’s 40 percent. Perot’s vote dropped to less than 9 percent. Clinton coasted to a second term, but with Republican majorities in both houses of Congress.
In the post-Cold War era, other trends were reshaping the American political scene. By the 1990s, the majority of Americans lived in suburbs, up from only a quarter of the population in the 1950s. The combination of suburbanization and the Voting Rights Act typically led to the nation’s urban centers electing liberal Democrats, often African-Americans or Latinos who reflected their districts majority, and the surrounding suburbs electing white conservatives who reflected these districts. Especially in the South and West, Republican victories often came at the cost of moderates of either party, rather than liberal Democrats, with the result that, as the Republican Party got more conservative, the Democratic Party got more liberal.
Since 1900, if not earlier, the Republican Party represented the elite, whether major corporate executives, Wall Street investors, or small town business leaders. The Democrats were the party of the working class, especially union members. The New Deal Coalition, which had kept Congress solidly Democratic for so long, included union members, urban immigrants (especially the Irish), and the white South. During the
29.1
29,2
293
Defense of Marriage Act
Legislation that required the federal government to ignore provisions of any state act recognizing same-sex marriages; was declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2013.
Chapter 29 A New World Order 849
L ■
Ml
M2
Oslo Accords
A 1993 agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in which Israel agreed that the PLO could govern the West Bank and Gaza Strip in exchange for PLO recognition of Israel's right to exist.
New Deal, most African-American voters, who had traditionally been Republicans after the Civil War, shifted to the Democratic Party. However, by the time Clinton came to office, much had changed. Many white southerners had turned against the civil rights movement, which they associated with the Democrats, and had become Republicans. Many white workers in the North, especially those in ethnic enclaves, were making the same transition for the same reason. In addition, union membership had fallen to below 10 percent of nongovernment workers, reducing the union vote. At the same time, more and more middle- and upper-middle-class professionals, including teachers, journalists, lawyers, and many in high-tech industries, supported the more liberal policies of the Democrats. In contrast to either 1930 or 1960, when if one knew a person’s income, one could make a good guess as to their political party preference, no such guess was possible in 1990.
As the political divisions between the two parties grew sharper, the political discourse of the country grew more caustic. Angry talk radio shows drew huge audiences. Rush Limbaugh, who called women activists “feminazis” and environmentalists “environmental wackos,” drew an audience of 20 million. The National Rifle Association stridently attacked any politician of either party who voted for any gun control. Common Cause sought to speak for a liberal perspective. Few spoke for moderation or even good manners. Respectful differences did not sell radio advertising. Likewise, respecting differences did not win political debates in Washington in the 1990s.
Small Wars and Dangerous Terrorists—Clinton's Foreign Policy
Clinton once said, “Foreign policy is not what I came here to do.” Nevertheless, as president, he could not ignore the rest of the world. His proudest foreign policy accomplishment came early, with the passage of NAFTA, but it was far from his last foreign engagement.
Early in his first term, in September 1993, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leader Yasser Arafat shook hands in the White House after signing the Oslo Accords, which Norway had helped to broker. The Oslo agreement led to a suspension of the intifada, the Palestinian uprising that had been going on since 1987. The PLO recognized Israel’s right to exist and renounced terrorism, while Israel agreed that the PLO would assume governing authority in parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. It was an optimistic moment for peace in the Middle East that ended all too soon when an outraged Israeli assassinated Rabin.
In 1993, events in Somalia and Haiti demanded attention. Bush had initially sent troops to Somalia to help secure peace in that war-torn region of Africa, and Clinton authorized 440 elite troops. When American troops sought to capture a warlord who had ordered the killing of Pakistani UN troops, two U.S. Black Hawk helicopters were shot down in Mogadishu and 18 Americans were killed; the body of one was dragged through the streets of the city. Clinton immediately withdrew all Americans. In Haiti, when demonstrators blocked the landing of U.S. peacekeepers in Haiti, Clinton did not try to persist, in spite of his desire to support the democratically elected president Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
In light of experiences in Somalia and Haiti, Clinton took an even more cautious stand in Rwanda when civil war broke out in April 1994. For 100 days, Hutus butchered perhaps 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutus who had tried to stop the genocide. The United States and the world did virtually nothing although perhaps 70 percent of the Tutsi population was killed. After he left office, Clinton said that his failure to act in Rwanda was his greatest regret, but there was little support for intervention in 1994.
At the same time, the former Yugoslavia was continuing to come apart. Slobodan Milosevic, the nationalist leader of Serbia, wanted to create a new “pure” Serbian nation. He led a slaughter in which perhaps 200,000 Bosnian Muslims were killed by Bosnian and Serbian nationalists. Some 6,000 UN peacekeepers were held as virtual prisoners while the slaughter went on (see Map 29-2).
B«85°
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present

MAP 29-2 Yugoslavia Comes Apart. In 1991-92, the nation of Yugoslavia, which had been created in the aftermath of World War I, came apart as ethnic rivalries burst into warfare.

29.1
292
293
While the United States and most of Europe did nothing, the battle continued. Finally in the summer of 1995, Clinton ordered the bombing of Serbian positions. When in July 1995 Serbia forced 40,000 Muslim refugees out of a UN safe area around Srebrenica, and then murdered some 7,000 Muslim men and boys, Clinton determined that further action was needed. In August, after further Serb attacks, the United States joined with other NATO forces in massive air strikes on Bosnian Serb positions. The bombing and NATO support for Croatian and Bosnian Muslim ground forces led Milosevic to agree to join negotiations at the Wright-Patterson Air Force base in Dayton, Ohio. The Dayton Peace Accords led to a significant reduction of the conflict, the placement of 60,000 NATO soldiers in Bosnia, including 20,000 Americans, and the eventual war crimes trial of Milosevic. In June 1999, the American commander in Europe, General Wesley Clark, convinced Clinton that the United States needed to intervene again to stop Serbian aggression in the province of Kosovo where Muslims made up 90 percent of the population. A bombing raid on the Serbian capital of Belgrade resulted in a bomb falling on the Chinese Embassy, which killed several staff members and deeply hurt U.S.-Chinese relations.
Iraq also remained an issue, even though the war with Iraq over Kuwait was over before Clinton came to office. After the CIA concluded that Saddam Hussein had tried to arrange the assassination of former president Bush, Clinton ordered a missile strike on Baghdad that destroyed the country’s intelligence headquarters. The government also continued to monitor potential terrorist activity emanating from Iran or North Korea, both of which were seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
In his efforts at foreign relations, Clinton also tried to broker peace agreements. In 1995 he sought to recognize the government of Vietnam and supported a mission by three veterans of the Vietnam war then serving in the U.S. Senate, Democrats John Kerry of Massachusetts, Robert Kerrey of Nebraska, and Republican John McCain
Dayton Peace Accords
A
November 1995 agreement that began the process to bring peace to the former Yugoslavia. Chapter 29 A New World Order 851
29,1
29.2
Good Friday Accords
A 1998 peace agreement to bring a peaceful settlement to the long-standing battles between Catholic and Protestant factions over the government of Northern Ireland.
0,5
of Arizona, all of whom testified that there were no remaining prisoners of war in Vietnam and urged reconciliation. In addition, he worked for peace in Northern Ireland and in 1994 appointed former U.S. senator George Mitchell as special envoy. Mitchell helped broker the Good Friday Accords of 1998, a promising breakthrough in war-torn Ireland.
Terrorism at Home and Abroad
Terrorism, both domestic and foreign, posed unique challenges because terrorists were difficult to find, to predict, and to deal with. While international terrorist acts deeply frightened the United States, a new form of domestic terrorism, though perhaps less organized, stunned the nation during Clintons term in office. The actions of the FBI in the Waco, Texas, standoff with David Koresh had infuriated Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, who believed that the FBI attack needed to be avenged. They managed to build a powerful truck bomb, and on April 19, 1995, McVeigh drove the bomb to the parking lot of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City and detonated it. The resulting blast killed 168 people, including a number of children in a day care center. The bombing was the largest terrorist attack in U.S. history up to that time. McVeigh and Nichols were eventually captured, and McVeigh was executed, but government officials and the public knew that they were not the only Americans so disaffected that they might turn to violence.
Four years later, two deeply disaffected teenagers, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, whose journals reflected their fascination with the Oklahoma City bombing, went on a rampage at their high school in Littleton, Colorado, a day after the anniversary of the earlier bombing. Their deadly rampage was the first of what would be many similar school shootings, often in suburban or rural areas and often initiated by disturbed and angry males who sought revenge against teachers and more popular students and the fleeting fame that came with such actions.
In February 1993, only a month after Clinton took office, Muslim terrorists bombed the World Trade Center in New York City, killing six. Over 1,000 people were injured in the blast and 5,000 were evacuated from the buildings. The bombing
The October 2000 bombing of the American destroyer USS Cole in Yemen was one of several terrorist attacks against the United States during Clinton's years in office.
852 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
THINKING HISTORICALLY
The Causes of the Columbine Shootings

On April 20, 1999, two high school students went on a shooting rampage at Columbine High School in Littleton, Colorado, killing 12 students and a teacher before committing suicide. The two had planned the day carefully and came to school well-armed with rifles and firebombs. Ever since that tragic day, and through the other school shootings that have followed in subsequent years, people have tried to make sense of what happened and why. One journalist, Neal Gabler, writing for the Los Angeles Times immediately after the event, asked readers to locate the tragedy in cultural and historical context:
Of all the bizarre sidelights to the horrifying massacre at
Columbine High School in Littleton, Colo., Tuesday, the most bizarre may have been the story of the students trapped inside the school who called local TV stations on their cell phones and provided brief commentaries on the action. According to one report, they signed off only because they feared the intruders might be watching television themselves and thus discover the whereabouts of the cell-phone users. All of which suggests that even for the perpetrators and their victims, television was the great mediator.
By now, this is hardly surprising. Like so many real-life dramas in America, the Littleton tragedy became a media event even before the smoke had cleared and anyone knew what was really happening. Copters buzzed overhead, reporters swarmed the scene and commentators were soon delivering sententious analyses of what it all meant, giving us a sense of deja vu.
But tragedies like this are media events not only because the media immediately latch onto them. Often they are media events in two far more important senses: first because the perpetrators usually seem to have modeled their behavior after certain figures in the popular culture; and, second, because the rampages seem ultimately to have been staged for the media on the assumption that if you kill it, they will come. Or, put another way, what we witnessed at Littleton was not just inchoate rage. It was a premeditated performance in which the two gunmen roamed the school dispatching victims, whooping with delight after each murder. Without pop culture, the slaughter would have been unimaginable.
Begin with the killers. In the inevitable postmortems that follow these horrors, it was reported that the outcasts Dylan Klebold and Eric Harris were part of a high school clique whose members wore long black trench coats and which dubbed itself the Trench Coat Mafia, a cinematic image if ever there was one. They were also devotees of the computer games "Doom" and "Quake," in which players prowl virtual hallways shooting virtual victims with virtual guns. They worshipped Adolf Hitler, loved Goth music, and had a special fondness for Marilyn Manson, the mordant rockstar whose satanic persona is designed to scandalize parents of his fans. In short, Harris and Klebold were creatures of pop culture.
Given how much these two seemed to have been shaped by movies, music, and computer games, it is tempting to blame the media once again for providing guidance to young would-be sociopaths....
What helped give these fantasies body is yet another new instrument of the entertainment age: the Internet. Movies provided a personal reverie for those disaffected teenagers of the past... .With the Internet to connect them, teenagers are no longer silent sufferers....When you live within a virtual reality, you have to expect some addled individuals won't accept the difference between the movie or video screen and the screen of life.
Source: Neal Gabler, "Becoming Your Fantasy in Virtual Munch Beer Hall," Los Angeles Times, April 25,1999, reprinted in Stuart A. Kallen, editor, The 1990s (San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 2000), pp. 85-89.
Thinking Critically
1.	Comparison
What do you think about Gabler's description of teenagers in the age of cell phones, the Internet, and other new media in comparison to teenagers of other times? Does it seem accurate?
2.	Contextualization
In the context of the 1990s, what other factors should
Gabler include in seeking to understand the Columbine shootings?
29.3
llll
had been fueled by anger at the United States over its support for Israel and over the fact that U.S. troops had been stationed in Saudi Arabia near Muslim holy places. Some of the terrorists involved had gotten training from a relatively new terrorist group known as al-Qaeda.
The leader of al-Qaeda was a rich Saudi, Osama bin Laden, who had been expelled from his home country for his terrorist leanings and then expelled from Africa, where he had been living. He landed in Afghanistan and supported the country’s Taliban government. In February 1998, when bin Laden called for a holy war against the
Chapter 29 A New World Order 853
west, the CIA estimated that he had some 15,000 followers, though little was known about the hard-to-find organization. In August 1998, al-Qaeda operatives managed to bomb the U.S. embassies in both Kenya and Tanzania. Most of the 223 killed and 4,500 wounded were African civilians working in or around the embassies, though 12 Americans were also killed. In October 2000, another al-Qaeda bomb ripped a hole in the hull of the Navy’s USS Cole while it was anchored in a port in Yemen. Seventeen sailors were killed. In all, some 90 Americans were killed by foreign terrorists, mostly bin Laden’s al-Qaeda, during the Clinton years. Far worse was to come in 2001, but the warning signs were there.
Scandal and Impeachment
On January 21, 1998, the Washington Post carried a story that surprised, but probably did not shock, the nation. The president of the United States had been involved in an affair with a young White House intern and had lied about it to his wife, to his administration, to the press, and under oath. It made for a sensational news story, and in the months that followed, the young intern, Monica Lewinsky, and the sexual escapades of Bill Clinton, remained front-page news.
Kenneth Starr, a zealous lawyer and former Republican solicitor general, was appointed as an independent prosecutor in 1994 to look into accusations that the president and Hillary Clinton’s land dealings in a development at the Whitewater River in Arkansas had been improper. He spent the next 4 years, and a significant amount of taxpayer money, investigating but never discovered evidence of a crime. However, before being appointed, Starr was an advisor to the legal team assembled for a sexual harassment suit brought against Bill Clinton by Paula Corbin Jones, an Arkansas state employee who claimed that, while Clinton was governor, he had ordered a state trooper to bring her to his hotel room and sought sexual favors. Because of the trooper’s role, the affair came to be known a “troopergate” in the media.
By late 1997, both the Paula Jones lawsuit and the Whitewater investigation were crawling through the legal process with no end in sight and only limited political damage to the president. Then the situation changed rapidly. A disgruntled former White House staffer, Linda Tripp, befriended Monica Lewinsky and secretly recorded their conversations as Lewinsky shared intimate details of her relationship with the president. As Lewinsky described it, she began her affair with Clinton during the government shutdown of November 1995. Tripp then shared the tapes with legal counsel for Paula Jones, who used the evidence to bolster her case that Clinton regularly engaged in extramarital affairs. She also shared the tapes with Starr. For Starr, the tapes proved that the president had lied under oath and perhaps also urged Lewinsky to lie, both federal crimes that could lead to impeachment.
Clinton denied the whole story. At a press conference a few days after the Washington Post story broke, he said, “I want to say one thing to the American people. I want you to listen to me. I’m going to say this again. I did not have sexual relations with that woman, Ms. Lewinsky. I never told anybody to lie, not a single time, never. These allegations are false. And I need to go back to work for the American people.” Hillary Clinton denounced Starr as being part of a “vast right-wing conspiracy,” and said—accurately—that he “has literally spent four years looking at every telephone call we’ve made, every check we’ve ever written, scratching for dirt.”
In the summer of 1998, Lewinsky told a federal grand jury about her affair with the president and produced a semen-stained dress that she had saved. Backed into a corner, on August 17, Clinton told a federal grand jury that he had engaged in an “inappropriate relationship with Lewinsky. That evening, he gave a TV speech in which he said, I did have a relationship with Ms. Lewinsky that was not appropriate....It constituted a critical lapse in judgment and a personal failure.” And he admitted he had misled people, including even my wife.” But he also insisted that the Starr investigation had gone on too long, cost too much, and hurt too many innocent people.”
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
854
Many, even among Clinton s closest supporters, were furious, if not at the affair, then at the lying. At a time when the country needed to deal with its economy and the terrorist attacks in Kenya and Tanzania, the president was distracted and untrustworthy. Starr and the Republican majority in Congress were eager to punish the president. Starr sent his report to the House of Representatives. In December, the House, with its Republican majority, voted to impeach President Clinton on the grounds that he had committed perjury in his original testimony to a federal grand jury and had sought to obstruct justice in the Paula Jones case. It was only the second time in U.S. history that a president had been impeached. (Nixon resigned before an impeachment vote.) According to the Constitution, removing the president is a two-part process. The House must vote on impeachment—essentially the same as a grand jury indict-menf then the House acts a prosecutor while the Senate acts as the jury, with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presiding. In Clinton’s case, the Senate was convinced that although his behavior was inappropriate, it hardly met the level of “high crimes and misdemeanors” specified in the Constitution. On February 12, 1999, the Senate rejected the charges against Clinton by a vote of 55 to 45 for the perjury charge and 50 to 50 for the obstruction of justice charge, a very safe margin since a two-thirds vote was required to convict. Five to 10 Republicans joined all of the Democrats in voting not guilty on the two charges. Clinton could focus again on being president. The Starr investigation cost $60 million.
Speaker Gingrich had been among the president’s harshest critics, but the impeachment did not turn out well for Gingrich. Just before the impeachment vote, Republicans lost five seats in the November midterm congressional elections. It was the first time since 1934 that the party holding the White House showed gains in midterm elections. But the speaker, who had been an avid prosecutor of the president, was further hurt by the revelation that he, too, had been having an extramarital affair with a young staff aide. He resigned as speaker and announced that he would leave the House. The newly elected Republican Speaker, Robert Livingston of Louisiana, turned out to also be having an affair and he, too, resigned.
While many in the media were fascinated by the whole case, the American public was surprisingly indifferent. Even if many did not approve of an extramarital affair, it did not seem as big an issue as it might once have been. Clinton was hardly the first president to stray from his marriage vows. Perhaps more important, the nation was prosperous and at peace in 1999. Clinton seemed to be doing his job, whatever his personal life. As the case wound down, Starr’s approval rating was 19 percent. Clinton’s seldom dropped below 55 percent in his second term.
The Prosperous 1990s
Although an economic downturn brought Clinton to office, an economic upsurge kept him there. After Clinton’s second year in office, the U.S. economy started to grow, and it did not stop growing for the next 6 years. Nearly all Americans were better off at the end of Clinton’s term than they had been at the beginning. The signs of the new prosperity were everywhere. Of the nation’s 107 million households, 106 million had a color TV by 2000, 96 million had a VCR or DVD player, 92 million a microwave, and 81 million had air-conditioning. Houses were larger than ever before. Americans were eating better as fresh, local, and seasonal foods became more widely available and more popular.
The prosperity of the 1990s was the result of many factors. Clinton’s budget, which brought down the federal deficit and produced the first federal budget surpluses in decades, made more money available for investment and spending and kept interest rates low, all factors in the prosperity. Experts argued about whether Clinton’ free-trade policies, like NAFTA, were helping or hurting the economy, but certainly more goods were in circulation as a result. Changes in agriculture made farms and farmers more productive so fewer people, working less land, could produce more food-and more variety of foods-than ever before-enough to feed the
29.1
29.2
293
Chapter 29 A New World Order 855
United States and much of the rest of the world. The boom in technology was producing many new products and cutting the costs of items such as TVs and computers that were already on the market. In addition, easily available personal credit, at low interest rates fed the consumer spending and consumer confidence, even though it allowed people to pile up worrisome levels of debt. In his last State of the Union message in January 2000, Clinton was able to say, “Never before, has our nation enjoyed, at once, so much prosperity and social progress with so little internal crisis and so few external threats.” No wonder the president remained popular and the people of the United States relatively happy.
Bush v. Gore—The Election and the Court Case of 2000
The Constitution prevented Clinton from running for a third term in 2000. Even so, he still had a remarkably high approval rating despite the affair with Monica Lewinsky that had tarnished his reputation. The logical candidate for the Democratic nomination was Vice President Al Gore. During the 8 years that Gore served as vice president, he established a solid reputation with special expertise in government operations, the use of the Internet, and the environment. Gores 1992 book, Earth in the Balance, described “humankind’s assault on the earth.” Although Gore had worked with Clinton for 8 years, he and the president were never especially close, and Gore had been deeply offended by the Monica Lewinsky affair. He selected Connecticut senator Joseph Lieberman as his running mate, the first Jew to be on a major party’s national ticket. Lieberman had also been offended by the presidents behavior and said so on the Senate floor.
The two leading candidates for the Republican nomination were George W. Bush, the governor of Texas and the son of the former president, and Arizona senator John McCain. McCain was considered more liberal compared with Bush who called himself a “compassionate conservative.” By March, Bush had wrapped up the nomination. Bush asked former Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney to handle the vice presidential selection and, in the end, Cheney himself became the nominee.
Gore made a fateful decision to distance himself from Clinton and did not call on the president to do much campaigning. He campaigned in favor of tough gun control legislation and for women’s right to choose on abortion decisions, and he promised to keep the Social Security trust fund in a “lock box” separate from the rest of the federal budget. Many, even among his supporters, found him to be stiff and “wooden,” hardly the relaxed and at-ease campaigner that Bill Clinton had been.
Bush promised a major tax cut, giving the current budget surplus back to the people. He favored allowing people to invest some of their Social Security contributions in their own stock market accounts. He promised to reform public education. He told the country that he was “a uniter, not a divider,” and would work with Democrats and end the divisive partisanship in Washington. In a not-so-subtle reference to the Lewinsky affair, he promised to restore “honor and dignity” to the presidency. He talked openly about how he had overcome his own alcoholism and about his born-again Christian faith. He was a surprisingly strong campaigner in spite of his tendency to mangle the English language with statements like, “families is where our nation finds hope, where wings take dreams.”
Two other candidates also entered the race: Ralph Nader, running on the Green Party ticket and critiquing the power that multinational corporations had over both Republicans and Democrats, and Patrick Buchanan, running a conservative and antiimmigrant campaign on Ross Perot’s Reform Party ticket. Although Nader and Buchanan might take crucial votes away from either candidate, no one gave them a chance of winning. In addition, several other candidates representing fringe parties entered the contest; however, they posed little threat even to siphon away votes from the major contenders.
As the polls closed on November 7, 2000, results for several states were still up in the air, but later that night, the deciding vote seemed to come down to Florida. Gore had clearly won a small majority in the overall vote—a final count of 50,992,335 for
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
856
Gore versus 50,455,156 for Bush (see Map 29-3). However, American presidential contests are decided by electoral votes, and at this point in the contest, whoever won Florida’s electoral vote would win the presidency. At one point, the major TV networks, using exit polls, announced that Gore had carried Florida. Later in the evening, they backed off. At around 2:00 a.m. they announced that Bush had won. Gore called Bush to congratulate him and was about to make a public concession speech. Then as new data came in, he called Bush a second time to say that any announcement was premature. By midmorning on Wednesday, November 8, everyone agreed that the election was too close to call. It would stay that way for the next 36 days.
Both campaigns assembled teams of attorneys to challenge votes and demand a Florida recount. Problems with Florida’s election procedures became apparent. Some African-American voters had been intimidated or turned away from the polls. In other places where votes were counted by punch cards fed into voting machines, cards with “hanging chads,” that is, cards that were not punched all the way through, were not counted, and in these places, the Gore team demanded a hand count. When Gore asked
29.1
29.2
293
	Electoral Vote (%)	Popular Vote (%)
GEORGE W. BUSH
271 50,456,169 (Republican)	(50.5)	(48.0,
		S0.996.H6
(Democrat)		
MAP 29-3 The Election of 2000. The presidential election of 2000 reflected how deeply divided the United States had become.The Northeast and West leaned Democratic, and the whole of the nation's midsection plus the South leaned Republican.
for a recount in four counties where the errors seemed especially glaring, the Bush lawyers challenged him in court. After the Florida Supreme Court sided with Gore, the Bush team took the<ase to the U.S. Supreme Court. On December 12, the Supreme Court ruled in a 5 to 4 decision that a recount in only four counties violated the equal protection of the law and that, given the time that had elapsed, all recounts in Florida must cease. The next day Gore conceded the election though he said he disagreed with the court’s decision “with every fiber of my being.” All five of the justices who voted to end the recount had been appointed by Reagan and Herbert Walker Bush (often referred to as “Bush, Sr.” to distinguish him from George W. Bush). The other four justices were scathing in their dissent. Ihe court’s senior justice John Paul Stevens, who had been appointed by Gerald Ford, said, “Although we may never know with complete certainty the identity of the winner of this year’s Presidential election, the identity of the loser is perfectly clear. It is the Nation’s confidence in the judge as an impartial guardian of the rule of law.”
29.2
Quick Review Were Clinton's high approval ratings justified, based on his domestic and foreign policy accomplishments? Why or why not?
TECHNOLOGY DOMINATES AN ERA
29.3
Analyze the changes in technology and their impact on U.S. culture.
While Americans battled over elections and a host of social issues, a small group of Americans were transforming the world in a very different way. In the 1990s, computer use and technological innovation—from connections to the Internet to the use of cell phones—became widespread in the United States.
The Birth of New Technologies
During World War II, the military sought ways to speed the mathematical calculations to send a shell in exactly the right direction to hit an enemy target. These first computers were exactly what the name implied: machines that computed distance, velocity, and air pressure, to get a shot where it was intended to go. After the war, the U.S. Army’s 1946 ENIAC computer, known as the “giant brain,” performed ballistic calculations in
Chapter 29 A New World Order
857
A
The ENIAC computer, created in 1946 and huge by later standards, allowed the army more computational possibilities than ever before imagined.
30 minutes that had taken 12 hours for humans to perform. With its 17,468 vacuum tubes, it was also the largest electronic apparatus on the planet. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, similar large mainframe computers became common throughout American military bases, universities, and industry.
A whole series of postwar inventions made possible the move from large mainframe computers to personal computers. In 1947, the Bell Labs invented transistors that could replace bulky and unreliable vacuum tubes. In 1958, Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments found a way to construct a transistor and the circuitry needed to launch the pocket calculator. In 1968, Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore founded Intel to market a microprocessor that was key to personal computers. The computer giants of the day—Burroughs, Univac, NCR Corporation, Control Data Corporation, and Honeywell—dismissed Intel. Within a decade, Intel would outpace all of them.
In January 1975, the first personal computer, the MITS Altair 8800, went on the market. The MITS company promised investors it would sell at least two hundred Altair computers. It quickly sold several thousand. The Altair had its problems. MITS shipped the computer as a kit, and the buyer needed to assemble it. One early purchaser, Steve Dompier of Berkeley, California, reported enthusiastically that his Altair had arrived “in the mail at 10 a.m. and 30 hours later it was up and running with only one bug in the memory.” Not everyone, however, had 30 hours to dedicate to making the new computer work. Those who did manage to successfully assemble their computers quickly realized the Altair’s second problem: it didn’t actually do much on its own. With no keyboard, no screen, and no disk drive, the Altair consisted of a case, a series of switches, and lights. It could do some things—solve mathematical problems as well as keep and sort lists. Dompier even found a way to link it to a radio and turn data into music. This early computer was a machine for dedicated enthusiasts, not the general public, but dedicated enthusiasts liked it.
One especially enthusiastic group in the San Francisco Bay area called themselves the Homebrew Club. The Homebrew Club, self-described geeks, loved the new Altair. Most were hobbyists who just wanted to have fun with the machines. But they also had a political agenda. They were rebels against the large government, universities, and corporations that dominated society and used technology, especially the giant mainframe computers, to do so. Homebrew wanted something different—a modern world in which the individual with a personal computer was more powerful than the corporation or the military or the university with its giant computers. Ted Nelson, another Bay Area geek, wrote in his 1974 self-published Computer Lib/Dream Machines, “I would
858 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
The Apple II designed by Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak had expanded computing capabalities for both personal and business use.
like to alert the reader, in no uncertain terms, that the time has come to be openly attentive and critical in observing and dealing with computer systems; and to transform criticism into action....THE PUBLIC DOES NOT HAVE TO TAKE WHAT’S BEING DISHED OUT.” A decade earlier, students had demonstrated in Berkeley with signs that said (mocking the instructions on cards then used in mainframe computers), Human Being: Do not bend, spindle, or mutilate.” According to Nelson, it was time to liberate the computer and put its power into everyone’s hands.
Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs were part of Homebrew. They decided that they should market their own kit that could outperform the Altair.
They sold their first Apple I computer in 1976. However, to accomplish all they wanted—to make the computer truly a popular device that everyone could use—they needed something simpler and easier than the Altair or the Apple I. Jobs studied the styling of popular European toasters and mixers in the kitchen department at Macy’s in San Francisco and designed the plastic case for what became the Apple II. The two also designed new uses for the Apple. The Apple II could be connected to a TV or a stand-alone screen and used to play computer games. It could be used for spreadsheets and word processing. Small businesses could do their own financial analysis.
Jobs and Wozniak also courted investors, including two Silicon Valley engineers, Mike Markkula and Michael Scott, who formed
the core of the new Apple Company that launched the Apple II computer in 1977. Apple was a huge success. Apple Computer’s revenue went from $800,000 in 1977 to $48,000,000 in 1979. That unbelievable start was only the beginning.
IBM, the largest of the computer companies, realized the money to be made in personal computers and was determined that “Big Blue,” as IBM was known, not be left behind. In the 1970s, IBM’s money and power came from its manufacture of office machines (the name International Business Machines actually meant something), including popular typewriters, and from leasing the large mainframe computers used by corporations and government agencies.
In the summer of 1980, IBM created a special task force independent of all the normal routines of the company to create a personal computer (PC), complete with operating system, that could compete head-to-head with Apple, and do so quickly. The task force did its work in 12 months, and the first IBM PC went on the market in August 1981. It was a huge hit. IBM made $43 million from its PC division in the first year, and the profits were soon in the billions.
The core of the IBM PC was Intel’s microprocessor, a power supply from Zenith, and printers from Epson. Even though IBM was one of the largest software companies in the world, the team also decided to find a different source for the software for the PC. They turned to a Seattle-based upstart known as Micro-soft (later simply Microsoft), led by computer enthusiasts Bill Gates and Paul Allen.
Gates and Allen had written a class-scheduling program for their own high school while students there. In 1975, Gates, like the people at Homebrew, became fasci-
nated with the Altair. He dropped out of Harvard and moved to Albuquerque, New Mexico, where the Altair was manufactured. He and Allen began writing software for the Altair and founded their company, Micro-soft, in April 1975. While Homebrew wanted to share all information freely, making personal computers part of a “people’s revolution,” Gates saw the potential for profit. He wrote a 1976 open letter condemning information sharing as “theft.” Software, Gates insisted, should be as closely held as any computer hardware. When the IBM team approached him, Gates assured them he could produce what they needed. He bought another operating system, the Quick and Dirty Operating System,” (QDOS), adapted it to the needs of the IBM PC, and renamed it the MS-DOS (or Microsoft Disk Operating System). Rather than sell the
Chapter 29 A New World Order 859
system to IBM, Gates licensed the MS-DOS system and received royalties on every IBM PC sold. The foundation was laid by 1980 to make Bill Gates the richest person on the planet within a decade.
By 1979, even before IBM set its team to work, Steve Jobs was looking for ways to improve the Apple II. He visited the research offices of the Xerox Corporation, Xerox PARC, which was something of a mecca to computer developers. The staff was intrigued but wary of the upstart Jobs. At Xerox, Jobs saw an engineer, Larry Tesler, working with a small box that he used to move a cursor around on a computer screen. Tesler called it a “mouse,” and with it, he could click on icons, open and close “windows” on the screen, and give the machine commands. The mouse was slow and bulky. The engineers at Xerox were not quite sure what to do with it. Soon, Xerox withdrew from the personal computer business—though it made a fortune selling printers that linked to PCs made by others. But Jobs felt like he had seen the future. He set a team to work designing a very different and more user-friendly mouse, and the Macintosh computer that went on sale in 1981 transformed the industry with its easy-to-operate system guided by a handheld mouse that replaced the need to key in commands.
The Y2K Scare of January 1,2000
As the nation prepared for the calendar change from 1999 to January 1, 2000, people were strangely preoccupied with their computers. Reporting on the ABC News, Forrest Sawyer said:
Surf through the Internet these days and you keep coming across a strange word, TEOTWAWKI. It stands for “the end of the world as we know it,” and it refers to the effect of a tiny, seemingly innocuous computer glitch, a tiny glitch a lot of people say could literally blow the lights out on civilization.
The fear of what was sometimes called the “Y2K problem” or the “Millennium bug” was very real and illustrated how completely the United States had become dependent on computers by 2000.
The Y2K problem was relatively simple. Beginning in the 1970s, computer programmers began using a two-digit code for the date. Rather than take up additional memory for 1978, they shortened the space for the year to two digits. Everyone—and every machine—knew that “78” meant 1978. But as 2000 got closer, some computer researchers began to get very nervous. If on New Year’s Day 2000 the computers suddenly thought it was 1900, who knew what might happen in term of systems malfunctioning or shutting down.
The threat was very real. The U.S. Department of Defense worried about crucial information systems shutting down. Banks worried that all information on their accounts could be lost. Electric companies worried that the electric grid, now completely computer controlled and monitored, could shut down. Hospitals worried that everything from heart monitors and breathing machines to the electricity and air conditioning in the operating rooms could stop. Internet-based businesses might not be able to operate. Ultimately, very little went wrong. Monitoring equipment in nuclear power plants in Japan failed but was repaired within a few hours. Bus ticket validation machines in Australia failed. In several countries, some cell phones stopped taking messages. In the United States, slot machines in Delaware stopped and the Naval Observatory clock briefly said that it was January 1, 19100. The problems, however, hardly resulted in the end of the world.
Some insisted that the whole Y2K crisis had been a distraction. Others knew how much work it had taken to avoid a crisis. Paul Saffo, director of the Institute for the Future in Menlo Park, California, said, “This was not hype. This was not software consultants trying to create a full employment act for themselves. This really could have screwed up our lives, and you know, a whole bunch of little geeks saved us.” David Eddy, a computer programmer in Boston who first coined the term “Y2K crisis,” said, “Ihe reason nothing bad happened was that so many people put so much work into it.”
Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present

860
American Voices
Peter de Jager and Richard Bergeon,
Countdown Y2K: Business Survival Planning for the Year 2000,1999
s more people realized the seriousness of what could happen on January 7, 2000, if the nation's increasingly networked computers all responded as if the date were January 7, 1900, many people began to worry. Many publications raised the alarm and in the end the problem was addressed though what some in retrospect saw as a hype others believed was a true crisis averted by the hard work of many experts. In any case, books like this one were very popular in the late 7 990s and spoke to the increasing public dependence on computers in many aspects of people's lives, something that had not been true even a few years earlier.
Introduction: Houston, We Have a Problem
It's New Year's Day 2000 and you're headed to your best friend's house to watch football. You're in a hurry because you don't want to miss kickoff, and you have to stop at the nearest cash machine first, because you promised to bring the beer. But instead of cash, the ATM commandeers your card, rudely informing you that it has expired.
Furious, but knowing you won't get much help on a holiday, you head to the nearest 7-11 intending to pay for your refreshments with a credit card. Pulling up to the store, you think a lot of people have the same idea, because there's a long line at the checkout counter. But the problem is not a run on beer; instead, you find out, the cash register is not working. The word, as it reaches you at the end of the line, is that the cash register is computer-based and requires a valid date to start up. And for some reason, it won't. "Some reason" is the Year 2000 problem, Y2K for short.
The preceding hypothetical—but probable—scenario is just the tip of the iceberg, and if collective public denial continues, it is an iceberg that will sink titanic computer systems worldwide. Like the unheeded warnings of disaster on the oceanliner Titanic, the alert to the Year 2000 problem has been sounded—on television, in newspapers, magazines, and newsletters, and via the Internet. Often, however, it has been defined simply as the inability of computers to calculate properly with 00—two zeros—signifying the new century. Further, media coverage frequently couches the issue in computer jargon, making it seem irrelevant to anyone other than programmers and information systems managers. The truth is, the Year 2000 problem will affect each of us, personally and professionally.
Source: Peter de Jager and Richard Bergeon, Countdown Y2K: Business Survival Planning for the Year 2000, Boston: John Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
How do de Jager and Bergeon describe the Y2K problem?
2.	Historical Interpretation
In retrospect we know that the problems described in the article did not happen. Reading the chapter in 1999 how might different readers have responded? What might have led different people to respond differently?
A lot of money was spent on Y2K preparation, perhaps $100 billion in the United States and $300 billion worldwide. Old computers and operating systems were replaced. Whatever the other results, the preparation for Y2K illustrated that, beyond a doubt, by 1999 the United States and the world had become deeply dependent on computers, the Internet, the World Wide Web, and related technology, most of which had not even existed 29 or 30 years earlier.
A
Connected Nation By the 1990s, the personal computers that were being produced by Apple and IBM as well as the systems such as those made by Microsoft that made them useful, were providing people with the ability to read, write, calculate, and do much more at speeds never before thought possible. Nevertheless, for the most part, these amazing machines each still stood alone. As early as the 1940s, dreamers like Vannevar Bush, founder of the National Science Foundation, were imagining a day when, through connected systems, “The patent attorney has on call the millions of issued patents... .The physician, puzzled by a patients reactions...runs rapidly through analogous case histories....” But Bush’s dream remained just a dream for almost 50 years. Only in the 1990s did it become possible for most people to make meaningful connections between individual
Chapter 29 A New World Order 861
Internet
The system of interconnected computers and servers that allows the exchange of e-mail, posting of websites, and other means of instant communication.
World Wide Web (WWW)
Since 1991, a protocol for information use on the Internet.
862 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New
computers—to share information, seek information, and combine information in heretofore unimaginable ways. Those connections were made possible by the development of the Internet, a massive network of smaller networks joined together. Actually, many separate developments created the Internet.
President Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara were preoccupied with the question of how the president could maintain communication with the nation’s far-flung military installations if a nuclear war actually happened. Without communication, the threat of massive retaliation in the case of a nuclear attack was a fiction. In the 1960s, however, government planners knew that a nuclear blast would cripple existing radio communications and knock out the nation’s highly centralized telephone network. To solve the problem, the Pentagon turned to researchers at the RAND Corporation, and a RAND employee, Paul Baran, led the team that would solve the problem. A decade later, on August 27, 1976, in the parking lot of Zott’s Beer Garden near Stanford University, a team of Stanford researchers sent a message from a computer in a van to another computer they had placed inside the bar. The message was received, and the first data transmission had taken place over a network. Further developments led to a much more sophisticated system.
A next crucial step in connecting computers was the development of the World Wide Web, which was achieved by Tim Berners-Lee. Berners-Lee was an English physicist working at the international physics lab in Switzerland, known as CERN, where he noted that the various scientists from different countries could not share information from computer to computer. He wanted to solve that problem. His goal was to find a way to connect computers and share information, lots of information.
In 1990, Berners-Lee found a way to create a common system so the information within files could easily be shared from computer to computer. He created a language for formatting files in hypertext so they could be read in the same way by the sending and receiving computers, and he called the language Hypertext Markup Language, or HTML. In addition, he developed a method of moving files of information, which he called the World Wide Web (WWW), although in the beginning, it connected only the computers within the laboratories at CERN. By the end of 1990, the World Wide Web was up and running within the small research community at CERN. By August
1991,	it was being made available at select Internet sites around the world, and by
1992,	it was being used by more and more people who were creating their own websites to send and receive hypertext information through the Internet.
In the early 1990s, the WWW was still primitive, but many also saw it as revolutionary. Berners-Lee made another crucial decision. Although he could have gotten rich off of his invention, he insisted that the World Wide Web would be free. On April 30, 1993, CERN announced that anyone, anywhere in the world could use the Web without payment of royalties or legal constraints. The information superhighway, as Tennessee Senator Al Gore would call it, was launched. (Gore did not “invent” the Internet but he did coin the term “information superhighway” in 1990 and sponsored legislation to support it in Congress.)
People needed the right software on their own computers to connect to the World Wide Web. One of the earliest softwares, and the first to be available at no cost, was produced by Marc Andreesen, a 21-year-old computer science major at the University of Illinois. In January 1993, he posted an announcement that said, “By the power vested in me by nobody in particular, alpha/beta version of 0.5 of NCSA’s Motif-based information system and World Wide Web browser, X Mosaic, is hereby released, Cheers, Marc.” Andreesen then moved to California and was recruited by venture capitalist Jim Clark to develop a more sophisticated connection system, and in October 1994, Netscape was launched as a browser. Soon thousands of people in the United States and around the world were connecting to the Internet for the first time using Netscape Navigator to get to the Netscape home page and from there to the world. Other systems, America Online (AOL) and Yahoo!, soon followed. Before long, Bill Gates was leading Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
Microsoft in the development and distribution of its own Web browser. By 1998, over 45 million people quite a jump from 15,000 in 1990—were connected to the World Wide Web. People could shop, do research, listen to music, or tour the world, without leaving the comfort of their own homes.
E-mail messages began replacing telephone calls and office memos in the late 1990s. Ray Tomlinson, a researcher working at the Defense Department inaugurated the use of @ as the core of an e-mail address. In the 1990s, people embraced the opportunity to send and receive messages at times of their own convenience rather than to have to answer the telephone. With the growth of television in the 1950s, some had worried that the printed word was in decline. After 2000, the reliance on text certainly saw a resurgence, even if in abbreviated form, as e-mail messages replaced telephone calls as the prime source of communication among Americans.
The Dot.com Bubble and Its Eventual Burst
If Y2K illustrated the degree to which almost every aspect of society had become dependent on computer technology by 2000, the bursting of the dot.com bubble illustrated how easy it was to inflate the value of every computer-related enterprise. Just as the world of electronic communications was being born in the 1990s, many people decided that the key to making a fortune was investing in the enterprise. As had happened many times before (see Chapter 22 on the stock market crash of 1929), overea-ger investors created a bubble that eventually burst.
In March 2000, an article in Barrons, the respected business magazine, asked, “When will the Internet Bubble burst?” A week later, Business Week ran a story on Internet stocks called “Wall Street’s Hype Machine.” Investors, some of whom were already beginning to have their own worries, paid attention. At the end of March and all through April 2000, stocks in high technology companies fell dramatically. Between March 10 and April 14, Yahoo! fell from 178 to 116. By the end of December 2000, nearly every technology company was down significantly. Some, like Amazon, com, recovered. Others did not. The value of specific parts of the new electronic world had shrunk, but the new electronic order was just beginning.
Google Becomes a Verb
In September 1998, two Stanford University graduate students, Larry Page and Sergey Brin, launched a new company in a garage in Menlo Park, California. They called their company Google. Page and Brin first met at Stanford in 1995, and by 1996, they had decided to search for and find information through the still-new World Wide Web. Other search engines predated Google, and others rose to challenge its dominance, but it quickly became the leader. As early as December 1998, a computer magazine was reporting Googles “uncanny knack” for producing good information very quickly, and by 2001, one could search for information on Google in 26 languages.
By December 2001, Page and Brin’s company had scanned or indexed 3 billion webpages, almost 80 percent of the total then in existence. And as the number of webpages grew, Google kept scanning and indexing. When someone in any corner of the globe typed a question or a name or a topic into the google.com search page, a series of interconnected computers at Google headquarters in Mountain View, California, scanned the data and presented a list of websites to the searcher. With the advent of Google, virtually all of the knowledge available anywhere on the Internet was available at the click of a few key strokes to everyone, not just computer geeks with unlimited time and patience.
Google never charged for its services, which along with its speed, was a key to its popularity. The company’s main source of revenue came from advertisements. Hotels in London may pay to get top billing when someone does a search of London, while sporting goods companies may pay for top billing when a search is done for sneakers.” In the years after its founding, Google kept up the rapid pace of growth and change. In 2004, Google launched Google Books. The company signed agreements
29J
292
29.3
Google revolutionized the ability to search for information on the internet through its powerful search engine.
Chapter 29 A New World Order 863
with a number of prominent libraries, including Harvard, Stanford, the University of Michigan, Oxford University, the Library of Congress, and the New York Public Library to digitize all of their holdings. The books whose copyrights had expired would be made available online. Books still under copyright—which included most books—would have only small selections available, considered fair use, and readers would be referred to the publisher for more. However, publishers were nervous about the fact that the whole book would be stored in Google’s electronic archives, and in 2005, the Association of American Publishers sued the company for violation of copyright laws. In response, John L. Hennessy, the president of Stanford University and a member of Google’s board of directors, said, “We need to rethink our copyright framework that is still a remnant of the past.” The nature of copyrights and, indeed, the printed page, would be in for dramatic changes.
The Latest Technology—Winners, Losers, and Change Agents
Soon after 2000, the fast-paced technological changes were producing some clear winners: companies like Google and Microsoft and the thousands of engineers and inventors who worked in places like Silicon Valley in California or Seattle, Washington. In addition, there were also clear losers.
When the Sony Walkman cassette tape player appeared in 1979, it seemed part of a never-ending expansion of the music industry. People could buy music and listen as they walked or worked. By 2001, however, the music industry was in deep trouble. New technologies gave consumers the power to simply download the music they wanted, at no cost. In the 1990s, the bestselling album sold 15 million copies. In 1999 alone, the music industry reported profits of $14.6 billion, but in retrospect, that point was the peak year for the industry’s profits. That number would fall to $6.3 billion in 2009. It was just too easy to download music, share it, and give it away. In 2001, representatives of the music industry were successful in a lawsuit closing Napster, one of the first vehicles for downloading music that had been launched in 1999, but the move was a public relations disaster because other technology for downloading made it easier and easier even without the help of Napster. If the industry was going to survive after 2001, then it would need to find a new way to create, market, and profit from music products.
Newspapers went through similar losses. After 2000, newspaper advertising, which generates most of newspaper revenue, fell dramatically, as did the actual sales of newspapers. Circulation kept dropping for most newspapers and some, like the Los Angeles Times and the Boston Globe, lost perhaps a third of all subscribers between 2000 and 2010. Many of these papers began small online versions, but readers had already become accustomed to accessing other news sites that had been designed specifically for online readers. Newspapers have yet to recover, if they ever will.
Many people also began to worry about the loss of privacy that can accompany growing information technology. Certainly, Google held a lot of information, not just on products but on people who search for information. E-mail was much easier to hack into and read than traditional letters or telephone calls, and the federal protection of privacy, especially in letters sent through the U.S. mail, did not apply to much of the new technology. Mobile phones made it easy to call from anywhere, but they also made it easy for people to track anyone’s location. Privacy, as civil libertarians had traditionally defined it, was a fast-changing matter.
In the decades after 2001, technology kept changing the way people lived their lives and interacted with others. A world without e-mail or without the ability to search the World Wide Web or listen to music or follow one’s friends on Facebook became virtually unimaginable. Yet before the 1990s, such a world did not exist. In that decade, the foundation for the technological future was set.
Quick Review Is the expansion of technology beneficial to people, businesses, and/or governments? Why or why not?
293
864 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
CONCLUSION
In 1989, the Cold War came to an end and “a new world order” began to take shape. After Reagans second term, when George H.W. Bush, a foreign policy expert, took office in 1989, he was well-positioned to see the United States through the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War. But as soon as the Cold War had ended, other international crises immediately began to preoccupy the Bush administration. During his term in office, Bush sent U.S. troops to Iraq to protect the independence of Kuwait, ordered the overthrow of Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega, and sent peacekeeping troops to both Somalia and Yugoslavia. Amid this international turmoil, the Bush administration also had to confront the increasing threat of al-Qaeda and other nonstate terrorist organizations.
While Bush focused on international issues, the U.S. economy fell into a recession, and when he raised taxes, despite an earlier promise not to do so, the conservative wing of the Republican Party abandoned him. Division within the Republican Party and the troubled economy allowed Democratic candidate Bill Clinton, whose campaign team motto was It s the economy, stupid,” to defeat Bush in his bid for reelection.
Clinton focused on two primary issues early in his administration: the economy and the nation’s health care system. He managed, with the help of a Democratic-controlled Congress, to balance the federal budget, lower the national debt, and secure approval for the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), but his health care plan faltered before it reached the U.S. Congress for a vote. Two years into Clinton’s first term, Republicans took control of the House of Representatives, forcing him to further moderate his positions. In his remaining 6 years in office, Clinton worked with Republicans to limit some budget cuts, end the nation’s traditional welfare system, and pass the Defense of Marriage Act. Although Clinton faced impeachment stemming from charges that he had lied under oath about a sexual affair, he kept his office.
The 1990s concluded with one of the strangest presidential elections in American history. It took over one month and a decision of the U.S. Supreme Court to determine that George W. Bush, not Al Gore, would succeed Clinton as president.
With the rise of new international issues as well as economic and social issues at home, dramatic developments in technology launched a new information era. Personal computers, which first became available in the 1980s, became commonplace in the 1990s. New companies like Apple, Microsoft, and Google emerged, and existing companies like IBM and Xerox adapted to changing technologies. In the 1990s, developments such as the Internet and the World Wide Web allowed people to connect and communicate at speeds never before thought possible. These advances also ushered in an era of speculation among overeager investors. Technology stocks grew steadily throughout the 1990s, but, in March 2000, the tech bubble burst and many people lost jobs and savings. By the end of the decade, technology had become so pervasive in American life that many feared a catastrophic Y2K problem if computers malfunctioned on January 1, 2000. In addition, concern grew about the computer’s impact on a range of existing institutions from the music industry to books and newspapers as well as the impact of computers on personal privacy. Nevertheless, by 2001, it was clear that the transformation of life as a result of technology was here to stay.
CHAPTER E
How did changes in the 1990s connect the United States to the rest of the world to an extent unimagined at the beginning or in the middle of the 1900s?
Chapter 29 A New World Order 865
Chapter 29 Chapter Review
29.1
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION,
1989-1993________________________ Explain the New World Order that George Bush described.
Review Questions
1.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the global situation faced by the United States in 1980 and 1990. What challenges and opportunities did the changed world present to the Bush administration?
2.	Contextualization
How did the power of conservatives within the Republican Party shape the Bush presidency?
3.	Historical Interpretation
What do the Thomas nomination hearings, the Rodney King incident, and the O.J. Simpson trial indicate about the state of race relations in the United States at the end of the 1900s?
THE CLINTON PRESIDENCY
Analyze the impact of the Clinton presidency and the Clinton-Gingrich conflict on the country.
Review Questions
4.	Contextualization
Why did Clinton feel that it was important to emphasize his departure from traditional Democratic ideas?
29.2
29.3
5.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the American political landscape in 1976 and 1996. What explains the differences you note?
6.	Construct an Argument
How would you explain Clinton’s high public opinion ratings throughout his impeachment proceedings? What does his high ratings tell you about how the public viewed Clinton and his congressional opponents?
TECHNOLOGY DOMINATES AN ERA______________________________
Analyze the changes in technology and their impact on U.S. culture.
Review Questions
7.	Synthesis
What role did new technology play in producing the prosperity of the 1990s? What other factors were important in this regard?
8.	Construct an Argument
Defend or refute the following statement: “The advent of the Internet was the most important advance in communications technology since the invention of the printing press.”
9.	Historical Interpretation
Who were the economic winners and losers of the communications technology revolution?
866 Part IX Certainty, Uncertainty, and New Beginnings, 1980-To The Present
The September 11,2001, terror attack on the World Trade Center in New York and
the Pentagon in Washington, DC, was a tragedy that shaped American politics for a
decade	CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
the Present
Tuesday morning on September 11, 2001, dawned clear and beautiful on the East Coast of the United States. President Bush was in Florida, reading to a class of second graders as part of his effort to get the No Child Left Behind legislation through Congress. Most Americans were going about their business at the beginning of another workweek as memories of summer vacations faded. At 7:59 a.m. American Airlines Flight 11 took off from Bostons Logan International Airport bound for Los Angeles. In the minutes that followed, United Airlines Flight 93 left Newark for San Francisco; American Flight 77 left Washington, DC, for Los Angeles; and United Flight 175 left Boston for Los Angeles. None of those four flights made it to their intended destination.
On each of the four planes, just minutes after takeoff, hijackers took control of the flight using box cutters—then legal to carry onto a plane—as weapons. Following existing procedures, designed for hijackers of an earlier era who often sought ransom or political concessions, airline crews yielded to the hijackers, and then quickly realized the new destinations. As terrified crew and passengers used cell phones to call relatives and authorities, the planes turned back toward the East Coast. At 8:46 a.m., American Flight 11 crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center. Seventeen minutes later, United Flight 175 crashed into the South Tower of the Trade Center.
Demonstrate an understanding of the most recent history of the United States from September 11,2001, to the present.
THE IMPACT OF SEPTEMBER
11,2001 Analyze the impact of 9/11 on the nation and on the presidency of George Bush and the impact of Bush administration policies around the world.
HURRICANE KATRINA AND ITS AFTERMATH
Explain the impact of Hurricane Katrina on the Gulf Coast.
THE FINANCIAL CRISIS OF
2008 Explain the costs and consequences of the 2008 financial crisis.
NEW LIBERALS, NEW CONSERVATIVES
Analyze the most recent political developments in the United States.
30.1
30.2
30.3
30.4
