Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 149
Significant Dates
1783	The Newburgh Conspiracy among Revolutionary War officers
Treaty of Paris recognizes U.S. independence
1784	Treaty of Fort Stanwix between Iroquois and the United States
Post-Revolutionary War economic downturn
1786	Annapolis Convention
1786-	1787 Shays's Rebellion in Massachusetts
1787	Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia Northwest Ordinance
1787-	1788 The Federalist papers published
State conventions adopt the Constitution
that their grievances had not been addressed by independence, and they continued to complain. Even among those who led the Revolution itself, there were great differences of opinion, especially regarding the best ways to govern the new nation and to maintain the liberty for which they had fought. What that new order would look like depended on not only where one stood in 1783 but also where one had stood before and during the Revolution. Exploring the efforts that helped create a stable and strong nation out of 13 British colonies requires, first, understanding what the end of the Revolution meant for different groups of people who found themselves in different circumstances.
THE STATE OF THE NATION AT WAR’S END
64
Explain how the outcome of the American Revolution affected different groups in the new United States.
For people of all classes, races, and political persuasions in British North America, the Revolution brought extensive change. Great inequality remained, but few people were willing to defend it as they had in the colonial era. Despite Abigail Adams’s plea to her husband John that the Continental Congress should “remember the ladies” or Jefferson’s assertions about the evils of slavery in his original drafts of the Declaration of Independence, sexism, slavery, and many forms of inequality survived the Revolution intact. Nevertheless, something had changed. No form of inequality survived the separation from Great Britain untouched. Forces had been unleashed, intended or not, that would undermine oppression. Thomas Paine, ever the optimistic recorder of events, wrote, “We see with other eyes; we hear with other ears, and think with other thoughts, than those we formerly used.” And he explained that freedom, to him, meant “perfect equality.... The floor of Freedom is as level as water.” Not all of his contemporaries wanted “perfect equality,” but passive acceptance of inequality or hierarchy was much less common after the Revolution.
For the Revolutionary Army Officers: The Newburgh Conspiracy
democracy
A form of government in which power is vested in the people and exercised by them directly or indirectly through a system of representation.
The American experiment in creating an independent nation that would be a democracy, governed by the will of the majority—or at least the white male majority—almost died before it was born. During the long months between the victory at Yorktown in late 1781 and the treaty that ended the war in March 1783, the army that had won the war came close to a military takeover of the government—a coup detat and a military dictatorship. Once the army had won its final battle, the Continental Congress asked the soldiers to wait. And the army, especially the officers, did not wait patiently in the year and a half that followed.
By the spring of 1783, the soldiers and officers had many reasons for complaint. The northern army was in barracks in Newburgh, New York. They were bored. By December 1782, they had not been paid for months. Pensions that the Congress had promised looked like they might never be paid. General Alexander McDougall and Colonels John Brooks and Matthias Ogden took a petition from Newburgh to the Congress in Philadelphia that said, “We have borne all that men can bear—our property is expended—our private resources are at an end, and our friends are wearied out and disgusted with our incessant applications.” Borrowing money from friends to survive did not sit well with these officers. They warned that “any further experiments on their [the army’s] patience may have fatal effects.”
The petition arrived in Philadelphia at a crucial moment. The new nation was governed by the Articles of Confederation that had been adopted during the Revolution. Under the Articles, which did ensure a democratic government, led by a Congress of representatives elected by the voters of the 13 states, the national government could not levy taxes or raise funds without the unanimous approval of all the states. In late 1782, some of the states had rejected a proposal to tax imports. Alexander Hamilton wrote, Without certain revenues, a government can have no power.’ Ihe government that received the petition from the officers was in just that situation.
150 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Those in the Congress who supported the idea of a more powerful central government used the army s petition to demand that the Congress be given the power to tax so it could raise its own funds and not have to depend on the generosity of state legislatures. These Federalists, who in the next decade formed the nucleus of the Federalist Party, led by Alexander Hamilton, made it clear to the army’s representatives that they needed to support the move to give the Congress the power to tax if they were ever going to get paid. The other main faction in Congress, however—leaders who later became the Republican-Democrat Party that emerged in the 1790s—feared maintaining a standing army and opposed a larger government fueled by national taxes. They wanted to maintain the national government just as it was—as a weak alliance of individually strong states.
Deadlock followed. It was a dangerous moment. The threat by the army’s officers to use force was real. They had been promised payment. Congress had now linked the payments to other agendas and postponed action. While most of those in the army were angry, there were also significant differences among them. A group of young officers were ready for action. They thought that George Washington was far too moderate. Their hero was Horatio Gates, who had led the victory at Saratoga and who disliked Washington. Some around Gates, perhaps in consultation with some Federalists in Congress, began planning for a military takeover of the new Republic. In March 1783, Major John Armstrong, Jr., published the first of what were called the “Newburgh Addresses,” anonymously belittling the “milk and water style” and “meek language” of the previous petitions to Congress and calling for a meeting of the officers to discuss the situation.
General Washington was horrified. Military action would undermine everything for which he and the officers had fought. But Washington was a crafty politician. He simply asked the officers to postpone their meeting by a few days, invited Gates to preside, and requested a full report, implying that he would not be there. The officers who wanted action thought they had won and that they could meet with Washington’s blessing.
But when Gates called the meeting to order, Washington entered the room and requested permission to speak. Though he was furious, Gates knew he could not refuse Washington in front of the other officers. Washington then attacked the anonymous “Newburgh Addresses” as “unmilitary” and “subversive of all order and discipline.” He reminded the officers, “I have been...the constant companion and witness of your distresses.” Would the army, he asked, contemplate attacking the Congress? “My God!” he said, “What can this writer have in view,” by recommending such measures?
Ihe speech worked. The officers cheered Washington. All threat of military action against the weak civil government was over. Congress voted to give a lump sum payment to all the officers who had been promised a pension and passed a tax on imports to pay off the national debt, including the debt to the army.
The so-called Newburgh Conspiracy was defeated. In November, the last British troops left New York City, and the American officers and their troops marched into the city and began its transition to civilian leadership. Instead of seizing power, the Continental Army began to disband, with payment as promised. Washington made a triumphal entry into the city and, on December 4, 1783, gave an emotional farewell to his officers. He then returned to civilian life at his home in Mount Vernon, Virginia. By January 1784, the army had shrunk to some 600 soldiers, ensuring a transition to civilian rule.
For Poor White Farmers: Shays's Rebellion
Like the officers of the Continental Army, the poor of colonial society—now the poor of the new nation—were also unhappy, in some cases violently unhappy. Some had served as enlisted soldiers in the Revolutionary army and had their own complaints about salaries. Beginning in 1784, the influx of imported goods that came with the war’s end created an economic depression that hit hardest those who were already
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 151
Having led the American army through the hard years of the Revolutionary War and ensured a transition to civilian government, George Washington said farewell to many of the officers who had served with him. He retired to Mount Vernon in December 1783.
Shays's Rebellion
An armed movement of debt-ridden farmers in western Massachusetts in the winter of 1786-1787 who objected to the state's effort to tax them to pay off the Revolutionary War debt.
poor. The most famous response to this unhappiness in the first years of the new Republic took place in Massachusetts and came to be known as Shays’s Rebellion, named for one of its leaders, Daniel Shays. Those who participated in the rebellion called themselves Regulators—not to be confused with those in the Carolinas who had taken the law into their own hands before the Revolution, but simply people who wanted to regulate the power of the new state governments.
In 1786, farmers in western Massachusetts began petitioning the state legislature for relief from economic hardships brought on by a significant increase in their taxes as the legislature tried to pay off Revolutionary War debts and by the postwar economic depression that reduced the value of farm products. For farmers who were used to being self-sufficient, the reduction in their income and demands for taxes to be paid in cash were too much to accept. They were being threatened with foreclosure and their way of life was being destroyed because they could not raise the money demanded of them. They had to do something.
When faced with the petitions of the farmers, the Massachusetts legislature, dominated by commercial leaders from the eastern part of the state, blamed the farmers for their own plight. In response, the farmers decided on direct action. They simply stopped the courts from issuing foreclosure rulings. On August 29,1786,1,500 farmers armed with clubs and muskets shut down the court in Northampton as it attempted to hear cases. They also stopped courts in four other towns.
The governor and legislature reacted by passing a Riot Act that prohibited 12 or more armed persons from gathering and authorized county sheriffs to kill those who disobeyed the law. They also suspended the writ of habeas corpus and authorized the governor to arrest and hold without bail “any person or persons whatsoever.”
152
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Shays's Rebellion, an uprising of poor farmers who were in danger of losing their land because of increased taxes, symbolized the discontent that many Americans felt during the economic downturn after the Revolution, but it also struck fear into many other Americans who believed the nation was on the edge of anarchy and needed a much stronger central government to deal with matters.
But the farmers, many of whom had fought as soldiers in the Revolution, were prepared to fight a second time for their rights as free citizens. From their perspective, the Massachusetts legislature was acting like the former royal governor. Shays and several thousand of his fellow citizens now took up arms, fearing for “our lives and families which will be taken from us if we don’t defend them.”
By January 1787, the Regulators had decided to overthrow the government of Massachusetts. Shays himself planned to attack the federal arsenal in Springfield and then march to Boston to “destroy the nest of devils, who by their influence, make the Court enact what they please, burn it and lay the town of Boston in ashes.” He came close to succeeding.
By late January, thousands of well-armed farmers surrounded the federal arsenal in Springfield, which was defended by 1,000 state militia under the command of Major General William Shepard. Unfortunately for the rebellion, different groups thought the assault was set for different days, and so on January 25, as a smaller group than expected marched on the arsenal, Shepards troops fired over their heads but then directly into their ranks. Four or five were killed, and the rest retreated. They did not immediately give up their idea of overthrowing the state government, but no other attack came as close to doing so.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 153
6.1
6.2
—
As 1787 wore on, the rebellion slowly ended. The Regulators had few friends in the government of Massachusetts or the surrounding states and were not able to establish a political base. In 1788, the economy began to recover, which made life more tolerable for farmers. Some of the rebels left Massachusetts for more remote places. Shays himself settled in Vermont. But the rebels had terrified the nation s elite and hastened the movement toward a stronger national government.
Fears of the rebellion in Massachusetts inspired other revolutionary leaders to act. When he first heard news of Shays’s Rebellion, Washington told Henry Lee of Virginia that the rebellion was “proof of what our trans-Atlantic foe has predicted. ..that mankind when left to themselves are unfit for their own Government.” But, despite their worries, men like Washington and Lee were determined not to let such a proof stand. The convention that met in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787 was a direct result.
For White Settlers Moving West
i V) TJ	' NORTHWEST St. Louis* TERRrr0RY	vIRG.N»;i;'
KENTUCKY
Ki~. z l/t	-~<X
Fort"
/ San Fernando
NORTH CAROLINA-
SOUTH
CAROLINA
o
c-


Fort Nogales i Natchez /
(GEORGIA r
SJ**t
New
Orleans
Pensacola

:st.
Augustine
V
Gulf of Mexico
The new nation was huge compared to the territorial size of the European powers. The Treaty of Paris recognized the eastern border of the United States as running along the Atlantic coast from Maine to Georgia. Since Britain had returned Florida to Spain at the end of the Revolutionary War, the new nation was cut off from the Gulf of Mexico, and Spain was not always a friendly southern neighbor. The Treaty of Paris also made the eastern shore of the Mississippi River the nations western boundary. The British proclamation line that had protected Indian tribes in the Ohio region and caused so much tension was not mentioned in the treaty. Control of the Mississippi River itself— the right to travel on it—would remain contested, especially since the river ended at the city of New Orleans, which Spain zealously guarded (see Map 6-1).
Within this vast territory, the 13 states hugged the Atlantic coast. American Indians dominated the interior, but without even the modest protection from white settlers that Britain had provided. More whites were crossing the mountains and claiming western lands despite the lack of government approval and the dangers of Indian attack. Royal charters gave many of the states’ claims to lands far into the interior. But soon after the Revolution ended, the Continental Congress began resolving conflicting land claims and creating new states and territories west of the original 13 states.
One of the first issues to be resolved was over the conflicting claims of New York and New Hampshire to the land on the eastern side of Lake Champlain. Many of the whites who had settled the region wanted independence from both. Local heroes, such as Ethan Allen and his Green Mountain Boys, had fought for the American cause in the region and wanted to control their home. As a result, Vermont became the first new state in 1791 (see Map 6-2).
One of the most significant accomplishments of the Congress that operated under the Articles of Confederation was the creation of the Northwest Territory out of lands claimed by Pennsylvania, New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts. Between 1784 and 1787, Congress set up territorial governments for what would become Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin. It took years of difficult negotiations before the original states gave up their conflicting claims to the interior lands, but ordinances passed between 1784 and 1787 created a new structure for the future Midwest. In 1785, Congress ordered that the lands be surveyed, set off into a grid pattern with most sections to be sold, while some were reserved for future government needs and specifically for the support of schools. The grid system established in 1785 was used in future territories, creating clear and well-organized boundaries for farms and towns, but encouraging widely dispersed settlements
ATLANTIC
OCEAN
-----Boundary claimed by
Spain after 1783
•----Boundary set by
Pinckney's Treaty, 1795
|	| Area disputed by U.S.
and Spain ■ Spanish fort • Spanish settlement
MAP 6-1 The American-Spanish Border, 1783-1795. In the Treaty of Paris, Great Britain not only recognized American independence but returned control of Florida to Spain, creating the southern border for the United States; though, as the map shows, the border was far from clear.
West of the United States was the vast Louisiana Territory, for the time being also under Spanish control.
154 Partlll
A
New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800 6.1
MAP 6-2 State Claims to Western Lands. The huge tract of land that the King's Proclamation Line had reserved for Indian tribes before the Revolution became part of the United States in 1783. Different original states claimed this land and one of the first duties of Congress was to sort out those conflicting claims. After 1783 no one in government spoke for the rights of the Native Americans whose land much of the territory had been.
RHODE ISLAND CONNECTICUT
1 | 6.2		
L ...	i.H-1	Uij
1..J Northwest Territory. Virginia claimed this entire
region and ceded it to the national government in 1784. Other states ceded their conflicting claims as indicated.
Southwest Territory (other state cessions) Disputed claim between U.S. and Spain
“ " Claimed by New York (ceded 1782)
— Boundaries for claims by other eastern states
rather than compact communities (see Map 6-3). The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 banned slavery in these territories as well as mandating religious freedom and the development of public schools. The act also declared that “the utmost good faith shall always be observed towards the Indians; their lands and property shall never be taken from them without their consent,” though little was done to enforce this provision.
Further south, white settlement was, if anything, proceeding faster. An accomplished soldier, hunter, and trapper, Daniel Boone first explored the trans-Appalachian territory that would be known as Kentucky in 1767 when it was still off limits to whites. As the Revolution was starting in 1775 and the British ability to stop settlement was ebbing, Boone blazed the “Wilderness Trail” through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachians and established a settlement he called Boonesborough. During and after the war, many more settlers followed the Wilderness Trail. Virginia gave up its long-standing claims to the region, and the federal government, recognizing that there were already slaves in the territory, admitted Kentucky to the union as a slave state in 1792 and Tennessee in 1796.
The Northwest Ordinance of 1787
Legislation passed by Congress under the Articles of Confederation that provided for public schools, the sale of government land, and prohibited slavery in the Northwest Territories.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 155
6.1
5.2
-6 miles-
6	5	4	3	2	1
7	8	9	10	11	12
18	17	■	’T	14	13
19	20	21	22	23	24
30	29	28	27	26	
31	32	33	34	35	
THE SURVEY SYSTEM
A township (36 square miles)
Income from section 16 reserved for school support
HOne section (1 sq. mi.)
Quarter-quarter-sections (40 acres)
Half-quarter-sections
Pa,-;
1	| Northwest Territory
R~^|
Disputed boundary ■ British fort  ,


Superior
NORTH
(CANADA)
0837)"
Fort Detroit
oSgrVz I /z-4

' ■
; /.all

Pojflf-au-Fer’
P
Ont«ri0 " Z t>C - NEYJf" 1 Fort Niagara YORK 

MAINE) (Mass.)iy
’ Dutclyrtan's'Poirtt^// '
NEW /
) HAMPSHIRE
Z {	>
) MASSACHUSETTS (5
Vt	RHODE
P/ A ISLAND
4^ CONNECTICUT
S S ' INDIANA B
,j(W3) fW jNots. f{i8W7 ) \ Mr 1 ABM 7
?\f	KElUtKY -
> P ■ C	,..,,0-792) *) x>
I
BlSK, 'V' Z- z , "M <9
t f iv"",-T€lW^SEE(17^6)Z
‘PENNSYLVANIA
7	: -	J
NO^fW CAROLINA '
DELAWARE
IYLAND
ATLANTIC OCEAN
MAP 6-3 The Northwest Territory Grid System. The Northwest Ordinance divided the territory into what would become five states. It also created a survey system in which the land would be divided into townships made up of 36 "sections," 35 of which would be available to settlers and one of which would be reserved to support schools.
Even further south, the land west of Georgia that would eventually become the northern two-thirds of Alabama and Mississippi was organized as the Mississippi Territory in 1798, but the territorial government there was ineffective, and Georgia did not give up its own claims until 1802. (The southern third of Alabama and Mississippi was known as West Florida, part of the Spanish-controlled territory on the country’s southern border.) While the Congress tried to settle conflicting claims to the western lands, the Indians, who had the oldest claim to the land, had no inclination to give it up.
For American Indians
For the federal Congress, the greatest threat to the new United States came from American Indians. For most of the tribes who lived between the Atlantic coast and the Mississippi River, the end of the American Revolution was one more disaster among many. Despite the loyalty of the Iroquois to the British during the Revolution, the kings government agreed to the Treaty of Paris in 1783, which ceded all the lands between the Atlantic coast and the Mississippi and south of the Great Lakes and Canada to the new United States, without consulting with their old allies. The Proclamation Line limiting white settlement was gone. Among the many Indian tribes, even among the Iroquois, there were differing responses to the British failure to honor their loyalty. Many Indian leaders saw no reason to honor a treaty in which they had played no part and continued to act as if much of New York and Pennsylvania and all lands west of the Ohio River belonged to them.
Under the leadership of Joseph Brant, the Mohawks, who had fought so hard for the British between 1776 and 1781, petitioned the British authorities in Quebec for land on the British side of the new border and were granted a large tract in Canada. But they, like other tribes, did not let an international boundary limit their range of hunting or living. New York and Pennsylvania petitioned the Congress for help with the Indian tribes on their western frontiers, and the New York legislature considered expelling all the tribes of the Six Nations because of their alliance with the British during the war (see Map 6-4).
156 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
6.1
MAP 6-4 Ohio in the 1780s. The land that would later become the state of Ohio was a battlefield in the 1780s. While Great Britain included the land as part of the newly independent United States in 1783, in reality Native American tribes were the dominant force in the region and they often received aid from their Canadian-based British allies.
Through the Treaty of Paris, the British also promised to withdraw from all forts south of the Great Lakes. As a result, a power vacuum was looming in the region, though the British were slow to honor their commitment to leave their western forts. Rather than depend on state militia, Congress in 1783 began to create the U.S. Army to occupy Fort Niagara near today’s Buffalo, New York, and Fort Pitt, today’s Pittsburgh. Although Congress could create an army, its difficulty in raising funds meant that the Secretary of War, former General Henry Knox, had to beg for money to keep the army paid, fed, and supplied, which strengthened the hand of Indian leaders committed to resisting white expansion. And many meant to resist.
The Iroquois were far from the only Indians who began to resist American expansion violently. These tribes had never formally agreed to peace with the new nation, and they attacked both the army and the settlers. The small battles—individual attacks, kidnappings, and destruction of property—continued as they had during the Revolution. The U.S. Army was far too small, ill-trained, and ill-supplied to be much of a deterrent. Given how weak the army was, the Indians held the upper hand in the Northwest Territory and Kentucky.
A temporary peace along the New York border was secured in October 1784 by the Treaty of Fort Stanwix between some of the Iroquois and the U.S. government. But many, including Sagoyewatha (Red Jacket) of the Seneca and Joseph Brant opposed the treaty, and it did not hold. In fact, the Indians of the Northwest Territory would remain virtually at war with the United States from 1785 until 1795.
Treaty of Fort Stanwix
A 1784 treaty between one faction of the Iroquois and the U.S. government that sought to end the violent battles over land in New York, Pennsylvania, and the Ohio River Valley to the west.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 157
Joseph Brant, or Thayendanegea, was a leader among the Mohawks, who convinced many in the Iroquois federation to support the British cause during the Revolution and oppose American expansion after the war, as he negotiated for Native American rights. He was one of the very few people of any race to meet with both George Washington and King George III.
After the Treaty of Fort Stanwix was signed, Brant sailed for London where he met with many high-ranking British officials and had an audience with King George III. He sought financial support for his people as compensation for their role on the British side in the Revolution, and he—and his British hosts—also seem to have devel-oped a plan for Indian resistance to the new American nation.
In 1785 and 1786, Brant began to create an Indian confederation that could successfully resist the United States. The confederation included not only representatives of the Iroquois but also many other tribes who had been traditional enemies of the Iroquois as well as Cherokees from much further south and smaller tribes who resided in the Ohio River Valley. It would be one of the most unified and effective adversaries that the United States would face. The Indians demanded that the Congress ensure that white settlement ended at the Ohio River.
While the Indians and Congress negotiated fitfully, the frontier remained a violent place. In the late 1780s, 1,500 white settlers and at least as many Indians in Ohio and Kentucky were killed (see Map 6-5). The United States had no intention of ceding as much land to the Indians as they demanded, but under the Articles of Confederation, it was difficult to organize an army to enforce the government’s claims. The need to create a government strong enough to counter the Indians led many to support the Constitution in 1787.
For Slaves, Former Slaves, and Those Who Claimed Ownership of Them
In 1791, Benjamin Banneker, a free African-American whose parents had been slaves, wrote to Thomas Jefferson, then Washingtons secretary of state, reminding him that in 1776 Jefferson had written, “that all men are created equal, and that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights.” Banneker continued:
[B]ut sir, how pitiable is it to reflect that although you were so fully convinced of the benevolence of the Father of mankind...you should... counteract his mercies, in detaining by fraud and violence so numerous a part of my brethren, under groaning captivity and cruel oppression, that you should...be found guilty of that most criminal act, which you professedly detested in others, with respect to yourselves.
Banneker would not let Jefferson forget the contradiction at the heart of the new American enterprise and Jefferson’s own life.
As Banneker’s letter indicates, many slaves and former slaves understood that the words freedom and liberty also ought to count for them. By the end of the Revolution, many whites agreed. Back in 1775, Thomas Paine asked how Americans could complain about British tyranny “while they hold so many hundreds of thousands in slavery?”
The issue of freedom and liberty seemed to be gaining ground for some slaves after 1776. News traveled slowly, but word spread that in 1794, in the midst of the French Revolution, the French National Convention had abolished slavery, and then that slaves in France s most lucrative Caribbean colony had won independence for what became the black-led Republic of Haiti.
When Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown in 1781, he had between 4,000 and 5,000 former slaves with his army. Many more were in other British-held areas, especially New York City. As the war ended, the British returned some slaves to old masters, gave others to new masters in the Caribbean, or simply abandoned them. But many former slaves also sailed with the British when they left the colonies, some settling as free people in Canada, England, or West Africa. A former slave named Boston King wrote that, “The English had compassion upon us in the day of distress. Soon after, ships were fitted out, and furnished with every necessary for conveying us to Nova Scotia. Life was not easy for African-Americans in Nova Scotia, but they were free.
By the time George Washington was inaugurated president in 1789, slavery had been abolished in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont and was dying—
though slowly—throughout the north. Northern slaves worked as household help and J 58 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
I I
Major Southeastern Indian groups f i Attempted state of Franklin —— Spanish boundary claim —— U.S. boundary set in 1783 treaty with England Spanish Louisiana, eastern boundary •— Spanish East Florida, northern boundary
—	Spanish West Florida
-	- Natchez Trace
6.1
6.2

MAP 6-5 Tribal Land Claims 1783-1788. Especially in the southwest of the new United States, strong Native American tribes clamed large areas and did not much care whether the U.S. or Spain claimed the territory since they did not want settlers from either country.
labored in factories and farms. New York had the most slaves in the north, concentrated in Manhattan but also working on the great estates of the Hudson Valley. New Jersey and Rhode Island were next in number. In the north, however, more money was made on the slave trade than on slave labor. The Northwest Ordinance prohibited slavery in the Ohio region. Many thought slavery would also die out in Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia. Only in the Carolinas, Georgia, and the new western areas of Kentucky and Tennessee was slavery still strong.
Despite the regional differences, by 1789, 1 in 10 African-Americans was a free person. Some had won their freedom through the army. Some had won through state action. Some had been set free by individual slave owners. But in 1789, one could not assume that to be black was to be a slave. That truth was a significant change from 1776 when free blacks were a definite exception in every one of the 13 colonies.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 159
r
6.1
6.2
After Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Vermont abolished slavery, other northern states with more slaves moved exceedingly slowly toward gradual emancipation (Table 6-1). The Pennsylvania law of 1780 declared slavery “disgraceful to any people,” but then set up a system in which the first slaves would not be freed until 1808 and the last would not be emancipated until 1847. New York’s abolition law of 1799 and New Jersey’s of 1804, as well as similar laws in Connecticut and Rhode Island, were equally slow in their operations. Although every northern state had started the process of ending slavery before 1800, it was almost 1850 before slavery disappeared in the north.
Free blacks sometimes found work in the same households where they had been slaves. Black men worked on merchant ships, whaling vessels, or even in the navy. (The racially diverse crew of the whaling ship Pequod in Herman Melville’s 1851 novel Moby Dick was not unusual.) In Philadelphia, New York, Providence, and Boston, many blacks worked on the docks. Throughout the northern states more and more free blacks referred to themselves as Africans or, as the Free African Society of Philadelphia said, “free Africans and their descendants.”
In the region encompassing Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, slavery did not die out, but slave life changed after the Revolution. Some masters heeded the revolutionary language of freedom. James Madison freed one slave named Billy because he came to fear that Billy’s love of freedom meant he was no longer “a fit companion for fellow slaves.” George Washington wrote often of his wish that slavery could be gradually abolished and left instructions in his will that all his slaves should be free after he and Martha died. Other planters in the region also freed slaves. Slaves who had run away during the war managed to establish new identities and maintain their freedom, especially in cities like Baltimore, Richmond, and the new District of Columbia. By 1810, almost a quarter of the African-Americans in Maryland, a third in the District of Columbia, and six or seven percent in Virginia and North Carolina were free. A thriving community of free people of African descent emerged. As a sign of their growing confidence, in 1792, Thomas Brown, a black Revolutionary War veteran in Baltimore, ran, although unsuccessfully, for the Maryland legislature, promising to “represent so many hundreds of poor Blacks.”
TABLE 6-1 The Free Black Population in the Early United States
State	Free black population in 1790	Total black population in 1790	Percentage of free blacks in total black population	Free black population in 1810	Total black population in 1810	Percentage of free blacks in total black population
New Hampshire	630	788	80%	970	970	100%
Vermont	255	271	94%	750	750	100%
Massachusetts	6,001	6,001	100%	7,706	7,706	100%
Connecticut	2,808	5,572	50%	6,453	6,763	95%
Rhode Island	3,407	4,355	78%	3,609	3,717	97%
New York	4,654	25,978	18%	25,333	40,350	63%
New Jersey	2,762	14,185	19%	7,843	18,694	42%
Pennsylvania	6,537	10,324	63%	22,492	23,287	97%
Delaware	3,899	12,786	30%	13,136	17,313	76%
Maryland	8,043	111,079	7%	33,927	145,429	23%
Virginia	12,866	305,493	4%	30,570	423,088	7%
North Carolina	4,975	105,547	5%	10,266	179,090	6%
Kentucky	114	12,544	1%	1,713	82,274	2%
Tennessee	361	3,778	10%	1,317	45,845	3%
District of Columbia	—	—	—	2,549	7,944	32%
South Carolina	1,801	108,895	2%	4,544	200,919	2%
Georgia	398	29,662	1%	1,801	107,019	2%
Partlll

American Voices
Prince Hall, “From Slavery to Equality,” 1797
Born a slave, Prince Hall was freed before the Revolution, and after the war he played a leading role in abolishing slavery in Massachusetts. Hall helped create the African Lodge of the Masons in Boston and delivered the following speech to that group. He makes it clear that although African-Americans in his city are free, they are far from equal; still, he urges his audience to take heart at the promise of freedom seen in the revolution in Haiti.
Now, my brethren, nothing is stable; all things are changeable. Let us seek those things which are sure and steadfast, and let us pray God that, while we remain here, he would give us the grace of patience and strength to bear up under all our troubles, which, at this day, God knows, we have our share of. Patience, I say; for were we not possessed of a great measure of it, we could not bear up under the daily insults we meet with in the streets of Boston, much more on public days of recreation. How, at such times, are we shamefully abused, and that to such a degree that we may truly be said to carry our lives in our hands, and the arrows of death are flying about our heads. Helpless women have their clothes torn from their backs....I was told by a gentleman who saw this filthy behavior in the Common that, in all places he had been in, he never saw so cruel behavior in all his life; and that a slave in the West Indies on Sundays or holidays enjoys himself and friends without molestation....
My brethren, let us not be cast down under these and many other abuses we at present are laboring under, for the
darkest hour is just before the break of day. My brethren, let us remember what a dark day it was with our African brethren, six years ago, in the French West Indies. Nothing but the snap of the whip was heard, from morning to evening. Hanging, breaking on the wheel, burning and all manner of tortures were inflicted upon those unhappy people. But, blessed be God, the scene is changed. They now confess that God hath no respect of person and, therefore, receive them as their friends and treat them as brothers. Thus doth Ethiopia stretch forth her hand from slavery, to freedom and equality.
Source: Prince Hall,"Thus Doth Ethiopia Stretch Forth Her Hand from Slavery, to Freedom and Equality," (1797) in Manning Marable and Leith Mullings, editors, Let Nobody Turn Us Around: Voices of Resistance, Reform, and Renewal (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000), pp. 16-18.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What light does Hall's speech shed on race relations in Boston in the late 1700s?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What connection did Hall make between the revolts that would produce an independent Haiti and the situation confronting African-Americans? How might his analysis of events in the French West Indies have differed from that of many white observers?
In this region, slaves and free blacks worked in an economy that was more diverse than before the war. By 1790, slaves in Virginia and Maryland, for example, were increasingly engaged in growing wheat, a crop that required horses that needed tending, plows, and fertilizer. They also worked in flour mills and the ironworks, blacksmith shops, and other enterprises that were springing up in the region. Some slaves were “rented out” and moved from job to job, giving them a chance to learn more skills, travel short distances, make a little money, and gain a taste of freedom.
Other slaves from the region were far less fortunate. In the years after the Revolution, with the plantations of Virginia and Maryland stabilized in size, slave owners needed fewer slaves. So they increased their wealth by developing a new internal market in humans. They encouraged slaves to have more children and then, as those children reached adolescence, sold them, as they sold other agricultural products, for transport to places that needed more and more slave labor. Slaves were taken to join the white settlers who established the new states of Kentucky and Tennessee. Other slaves were transported to South Carolina and Georgia.
Further south, in South Carolina and Georgia, life for slaves was very different. Some of the fiercest fighting of the Revolution had disrupted almost every aspect of life in South Carolina and Georgia, and slaves had more opportunities to run away. With the coming of peace, however, the planter elite in these states was determined to reestablish a way of life that depended on slavery. Slaves represented between 40 and
A
New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800 Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 161
60 percent of the population in South Carolina and Georgia. Slave labor had produced great fortunes for the plantation owners before the war, and it would produce new fortunes for them after the war ended.
Whereas many planters in Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina felt the need to consider the rhetoric of freedom and perhaps modify the tyranny of slavery, planters in South Carolina and Georgia made it clear that they believed such language did not apply to slaves. As a result, the few free blacks in the southernmost states, often people who had black, white, and Indian heritage, were kept as far away from the slave community as possible so the slaves would not hear the contagious language of freedom.
In the 20 years after 1790, the number of slaves doubled in South Carolina from 100,000 to 200,000, and in Georgia it more than tripled from 30,000 to over 100,000. The rapid growth of the slave population in South Carolina and Georgia at the end of the 1700s also led to a new kind of community life in the slave quarters of these large plantations. Unlike those who owned a lone slave or a single slave family, which could be closely supervised, the largest plantations in South Carolina and Georgia had hundreds of slaves in the 1790s. Slave labor created great wealth, and the owners of these plantations were the economic elite of their states, but they were often away, preferring the social life of Charleston or Savannah. Slaves, though driven by overseers, were able to develop their own community lives and norms within the slave quarters, which had not been possible on the smaller farms and plantations of an earlier era. Having their own vegetable gardens sometimes gave slaves limited economic freedom. Religious gatherings provided communal support.
For Women: The Rise of Republican Motherhood
In April 1776, Abigail Adams wrote to her husband John while the future president was attending the Congress that would issue the Declaration of Independence in Philadelphia and she was managing the family and farm in Quincy, Massachusetts, from which he was so often absent. She told him to “remember the ladies.” And she warned, “Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of husbands.... If particular care and attention is not paid to the ladies we are determined to foment a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound by any laws in which we have no voice or representation.” Abigail was quite serious in her demand. Her husband, however, treated his wife’s plea as a kind of joke. John Adams wrote back to his wife saying, “Our struggle has loosened the bonds of government everywhere; that children and apprentices were disobedient,” but, he said, Abigail’s letter “was the first intimation that another tribe, more numerous and powerful than all the rest, were grown discontented.” We do not know how she responded to having her husband lump her plea for a voice in government with the discontent of children and apprentices. Abigail and John had a close marriage, but while she was serious about wanting the American Revolution to recognize more rights for women, he was equally determined to ignore her plea.
Women, of course, fell into all of the different groups that men did. American Indian women, most of whom like the men had supported the British, often paid a high price for their loyalty to Britain. Mary (Molly) Brant, the sister of Joseph Brant, convinced many Iroquois to support an Iroquois-British alliance during the war. When the war ended, she found a new home in Canada, reminding the British authorities that they were not providing the support they had promised her people.
Slave women also sided with the British more often than with the American Revolutionaries. With British armies operating in the southern colonies, and the British welcoming slaves to their side, women as well as men fled to freedom with the British. Of the 23 slaves who ran away from Thomas Jefferson’s plantations during the Revolution, 13 were female. More than 40 percent of all of the former slaves who left with the British at the end of the war were women.
162 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Some white women rich and poor—also supported the British cause and paid dearly for it. With the coming of the war, many Loyalist wives stayed behind to mind their homes when their husbands joined the British army or fled to Canada. These women faced hostile neighbors and local governments, and many lost their homes.
For white women who supported the Revolution, life was also hard, but the outcome was usually better. The Revolutionary War shaped the lives of most women who had supported it. For some, it changed virtually every aspect of life. After the war, Deborah Sampson, who had pretended to be a man and fought in the war, married and lived in Sharon, Massachusetts, but she was also entertained by President Washington, was granted a revolutionary soldier’s pension by Congress, and became something of a national hero. Other women did not easily return to their old ways, limited to the private sphere of their families. With many men away for months or years, women took on household duties that were, by long tradition, men’s exclusive sphere. Mary Bartlett, whose husband represented New Hampshire in Congress, reflected a changed attitude experienced by many. In her first letters in 1776, she wrote about “Your farming business,” but by 1778, it had become “our farming business.” The difference of one word that made it clear she now included herself in the ownership of their farm was an important change.
Many women who had coped with years of isolation during the war found that the political independence of the United States brought personal independence, too. More women postponed marriage, demanded divorces from unhappy marriages, and sought higher education as well as new—if limited—political involvement in the new republic.
For many Americans, women and men, the book, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, written in 1792 by British writer Mary Wollstonecraft, gave words to ideas that had been taking shape since the Revolution. In her appeal for equality, Wollstonecraft called for equal education, and coeducation, for girls and boys. In America, Judith Sargent Murray expanded Wollstonecraft’s arguments and insisted that women are indeed “in every respect equal to men.”
Important as they were, the ideas about total equality developed by Wollstonecraft and Murray did not become the dominant ideology of the new nation. Instead, something much more moderate, known as Republican Motherhood, came to dominate public discussions of women’s place in the new United States. As the ideology of Republican Motherhood was developed in pulpits and magazines after the Revolution, women would have an important role, but a limited one—not full citizenship but also no return to a merely passive role in the domestic sphere that had been prescribed before 1776. Republican Motherhood was a kind of middle position. Its advocates suggested that women would advise their husbands and raise their sons to be active citizens and their daughters to be part of another generation of republican mothers who shaped the nation from home. But to play this role, its advocates insisted that women also needed an education, perhaps a different education from men, but a better one than that given to their mothers and grandmothers.
In 1778, Abigail Adams wrote, “I regret...how fashionable it has been to ridicule Female learning.” After the war, she and many others planned to do something about it. Private academies, which had educated white male leaders for a century, began to open their doors to women, or more often, separate private academies for women were founded like the Young Ladies’ Academy of Philadelphia that Benjamin Rush opened in 1787. Rush, whose views reflected his belief in the ideology of Republican Motherhood, believed that the “attention of our young ladies should be directed as soon as they are prepared for it to the reading of history, travels, poetry, and moral essays...to the present state of society in America.” When Priscilla Mason graduated from Rush’s Young Ladies’ Academy in 1794, however, she condemned the arbitrary limitations that “have denied us the means of knowledge, and then reproached us for the want of it.” She continued, “The Church, the Bar, and the Senate are shut against us.
Having lived through the Revolution in Massachusetts and become a leader in the Universalist churches, Judith Sargent Murray also came to be one of the strongest voices demanding absolute equality for women in the new nation.
Republican Motherhood
The belief that women should have more rights and a better education so that they might support husbands and raise sons who would actively participate in the political affairs of society.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 163
American Voices
Judith Sargent Murray, On the Equality of the Sexes, 1792
Judith Sargent Murray was born into a merchant family in
Massachusetts in 1751 and lived through the Revolution as a young woman. She was a leader of the Universalist movement in religion, which believed that all people were saved, a belief that led them to emphasize equality, including equality of the sexes. She argued that differences between the sexes were due to educational opportunities rather than inherent qualities, and she wanted an education that would make women the equals of their brothers, husbands, and sons. She argued that the way society constructed women's roles perpetuated the stereotype of women as overly emotional and not thoughtful. With an equal education, she insisted, women could at least equal men. Her most famous book, On the Equality of the Sexes, was published in 1792.
Is it upon mature consideration we adopt the idea, that nature is thus partial in her distributions? Is it indeed a fact, that she hath yielded to one half of the human species so unquestionable a mental superiority?...May we not trace its source in the difference of education...the one is taught to aspire, and the other is early confined and limited. As their years increase, the sister must be wholly domesticated, while the brother is led by the hand through all the flowery paths of science. Grant that their minds are by nature equal, yet who shall wonder at the apparent superiority, if indeed custom becomes second nature.... At length arrived at womanhood, the uncultivated fair one feels a void, which the employments allotted her are by no means capable of filling... .She experiences a mortifying consciousness of inferiority, which embitters every enjoyment....Now, was she permitted the same instructors as her brother, (with an eye however to their particular departments) for the employment of a rational mind an ample field would be opened....A mind, thus filled, would
have little room for the trifles with which our sex are, with too much justice, accused of amusing themselves, and they would thus be rendered fit companions for those, who should one day wear them as their crown....
Should it still be vociferated, "Your domestic employments are sufficient"—I would calmly ask, is it reasonable, that a candidate for immortality, for the joys of heaven, an intelligent being, who is to spend an eternity in contemplating the works of Deity, should at present be so degraded, as to be allowed no other ideas, than those which are suggested by the mechanism of a pudding, or the sewing the seams of a garment? Pity that all such censurers of female improvement do not go one step further, and deny their future existence; to be consistent they surely ought.
Yes, ye lordly, ye haughty sex, our souls are by nature equal to yours; the same breath of God animates, enlivens, and invigorates us; and that we are not fallen lower than yourselves.
Source: Judith Sargent Murray, "On the Equality of the Sexes," first published in the Massachusetts Magazine, April 1790, reprinted in Eve Kornfeld, Creating an American Culture, 1775-1800: A Brief History with Documents (Boston: Bedford St. Martin's, 2001), pp. 127-132.
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
What differences did Murray note between the education of boys and girls? What consequences did she attach to those differences?
2.	Historical Interpretation
What vision of republican womanhood did Murray support?
How did her vision differ from that embodied in the emerging ideology of Republican Motherhood?
Who shut them? Man, despotic man.” An education that produced such a speaker, may have been more than Rush envisioned when he proposed the school.
Women also took a more direct role in politics when they could. New Jersey’s 1776 Constitution gave women the right to vote, but the provision was repealed in 1807. Ihe Bill of Rights that was added to the federal Constitution in 1791 gave all citizens—women as well as men—the right to “petition the government for a redress of grievances,” and women regularly petitioned Congress and state legislatures. After the Revolution, women also gained significant new rights to control their own property, which they had not had before the war. It would be a long time before law and culture would support the equality that Abigail Adams or Judith Sargent Murray advocated. But attitudes had begun to change.
Within the ideology of Republican Motherhood, however, two double standards emerged. First, middle- and upper-class white women were expected to be the guardians of sexual morality. Men might stray, but, as a Philadelphia newspaper editorialized, “Ladies, much depends on you, towards a reformation in the morals of our sex.” And if men did stray, it was expected they would do so only with lower-class or poor white women or with blacks, slave or free. Second, servants and working women were
Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
Although it is often forgotten, New Jersey's 1776 state constitution gave that state's women the right to vote, a right they exercised enthusiastically until the provision was repealed in 1807.
not included in either the rules or the opportunities for education and influence that the ideal of Republican Motherhood gave to supposedly all women, but in reality the increasingly well-educated and active women of higher social and economic status.
Quick Review Did the Revolutionary War have a truly revolutionary effect on Britain's former colonies? Address the changes, or lack thereof, among at least two groups in your answer.
CREATING A GOVERNMENT: WRITING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION
Explain the needs, pressures, and compromises that led to writing and adopting the Constitution.
6.2
The years immediately after the Revolution were not easy ones in the new United States of America. Many Americans were unhappy with the situation in which they found themselves. Farmers were angry about taxes. Frontier whites and Indians fought for control of the land. Many women were agitating for their own rights. Some of the most famous revolutionary leaders, including Washington, Franklin, and Hamilton, were determined to end the growing chaos and reshape the new nation they had helped to create.
The Crisis of the 1780s: The Failure of the Articles of Confederation
The problems that the nation faced in the 1780s had many sources. Ihe Articles of Confederation that governed the nation were essentially a treaty among 13 independent nations. All 13 states needed to agree to levy any taxes, and 9 states had to agree to pass a law. Real sovereignty—in this case, the ability to make the most important decisions about how Americans should govern themselves and pay for their government—rested with the state governments.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 165
Annapolis Convention
Conference of state delegates that issued a call in September 1786 for a convention to consider changes to the Articles of Confederation.
For present-day citizens, who live in a world in which a national government rules almost every spot on the planet, such a loose federation may seem surprising. But for the revolutionary generation, the arrangement was not strange at all. The separate colonies had experienced over a century of independent relationships with London. Until the 1760s, the links between each colony and Britain were much stronger than the ties between the various colonies. When Americans looked to Europe, they saw that small independent states and cities were the rule in what is now Germany and Italy. In that context, viewing Massachusetts, New York, and Virginia as independent states that were linked only in a loose confederation did not seem odd.
Nevertheless, leading citizens were concluding that the American confederation was not working. They believed that it was too weak, the state legislatures too strong, and that this imbalance was causing serious problems. Unlike their European models, the American confederation had acted as a united front to achieve independence, and that effort had a ripple effect on subsequent actions. Under the treaty that ended the Revolution, the United States—all of the states together—had promised to pay debts that it had incurred during the war—pensions for soldiers as well as the repayment of loans to U.S. citizens and foreign creditors. But Congress had no money and could not seem to raise any, given the requirement that all 13 states agree to any tax. The credit rating of the new nation was dropping quickly, and the lack of faith in the government’s ability to pay its debts was strangling the national economy. If the government could not pay off the loans negotiated during the Revolution, many European creditors thought, why loan any more money to either the American government or American commercial enterprises?
The financial crisis had additional impacts. Indian tribes along the frontier were growing stronger, and the new nation risked losing control of its western lands because it could not afford a strong army to protect them. In 1785, a Shawnee leader, Piteasewa, told commissioners sent by the Congress, “We are aware of your design to divide our Councils, but we are unanimous.” Although the tribes were never actually unanimous, in the 1780s they were still more than a match for the U.S. Army or the various state militias.
Moreover, many state legislatures not only failed to raise taxes or pay their state debts but also often simply gave in when mobs of farmers like those in Massachusetts took control of the court houses and stopped trials of those who had failed to pay debts or taxes. Charles Lee, one of Virginia’s leading citizens, complained to George Washington in 1788 of the legislature’s willingness to grant too much tax relief: “the public debts and even private debts will in my opinion be extinguished by acts of the several Legislatures.”
In September 1786, five states sent delegates to a convention in Maryland-known as the Annapolis Convention—to try to deal with yet another weakness of the Articles of Confederation—economic rivalry between the states that had led to a battle over navigation rights on the Potomac River between Maryland and Virginia and to a violent boundary dispute between New York and what would become Vermont. Ihe convention never had a quorum and did no business, but it did give some leaders a chance to talk about the nation’s problems. As a result, Alexander Hamilton wrote to the Congress asking that the states appoint delegates to meet in Philadelphia in May 1787 “to devise such further provisions as should appear to them necessary to render the constitution of the federal government adequate to the exigencies of the union.”
In February 1787, 5 months after receiving Hamilton’s letter, the Congress agreed to call a convention, but with limitations. They voted to ask the states to send delegates to Philadelphia “for the sole and express purpose of revising the Articles of Confederation, and reporting to Congress and the several legislatures such alterations and provisions therein as shall when agreed to in Congress and confirmed by the States, render the federal Constitution adequate to the exigencies of Government and the preservation of the Union.” On the surface, this call was hardly a mandate for wholesale change. But it launched the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and the Convention would far exceed its authority. Some, including Madison and Hamilton, planned it that way from the beginning. The result would be a radically different form of government than the one under which the United States had won its freedom.
Ill A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
The Constitutional Convention of 1787
The 55 white men who gathered in what later came to be known as Independence Hall in Philadelphia in spring of 1787 for the Constitutional Convention had instructions from Congress merely to propose amendments to the Articles of Confederation. The group represented the elite of the new nation. They had been appointed by 12 states; Rhode Islands legislature distrusted any effort to strengthen the central government and refused to send anyone to Philadelphia. Most were fairly young. Twenty-nine had college degrees at a time when that achievement was rare. Only eight had signed the Declaration of Independence in 1776. Except for George Washington and Benjamin Franklin, some of the most prominent leaders of the Revolution were absent. Virginias Patrick Henry and Massachusetts’s John Hancock and Sam Adams refused to attend because they, too, worried that the convention would undermine the rights of individual states. Jefferson was away as U.S. ambassador to France. John Adams was ambassador to Britain. Women and the rebels of western Massachusetts who had marched with Daniel Shays, slaves and free blacks, and American Indians were not represented. But in that summer gathering in 1787, the delegates produced a frame of government that has served the United States well for more than 200 years.
Constitutional Convention
Convention that met in Philadelphia in 1787 and drafted the Constitution of the United States.
DECISIONS ON THE STRUCTURE OF A UNIFIED GOVERNMENT
Coming to agreement at the Constitutional Convention involved long arguments and difficult compromises. The final result that the convention produced in September 1787 disappointed many. Surprisingly, all the delegates, even those who left in anger, kept to a pledge to keep their deliberations secret. All of the delegates wanted to be sure they had the time and freedom to talk through the difficult issues of the day without undue pressure from outside groups. No one outside the convention, including members of Congress that were still meeting in New York, had a clue what the distinguished group in Philadelphia would recommend. In the spring of 1787 delegates from 12 of the 13 states gathered in Independence Hall-now a national historic site—to write a new plan of government. After a summer of hard negotiations, they proposed what became the Constitution of the United States.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 167
Although he held no special office at the Constitutional Convention—serving simply as one of several delegates from Virginia—James Madison planned carefully and did his best to guide the convention's deliberations. His notes on the meeting provide the best record of what happened that summer.
Virginia Plan
The first proposal put forward at the Constitutional convention, which included two houses of Congress, both elected by proportional representation, and a national executive and judiciary.
separation of powers
A core aspect of the Constitution by which different parts of the new national government would have their authority always limited by other parts.
federalism
A system of government in which power is clearly divided between state governments and the national—or federal—government.
proportional representation
A way of selecting representatives in Congress based on the total population of a state, as opposed to having each state receive equal votes in Congress.
New Jersey Plan
A proposal of the New Jersey delegation to the Constitutional Convention by which both houses of Congress would be elected by states, with equal size delegations for every state.
Connecticut Plan—or the Great Compromise
Plan proposed for creating a national bicameral legislature in which all states would be equally represented in the Senate and proportionally represented in the House.
A relatively young delegate from Virginia, James Madison (1751-1836), who had served in the Virginia legislature during the Revolution and had authored the Virginia Statute of Religious Freedom, was the key architect of the Constitution that emerged, although he never held a special office at the convention. In preparation for the convention, Madison privately arranged for the Virginia and Pennsylvania delegates to arrive in Philadelphia a week before the convention opened. He used that week to craft a plan that could be presented as soon as the convention got underway.
On May 29, the first day of business at the convention, Virginia’s Governor Edmund Randolph, following Madison’s plan, presented what came to be known as the Virginia Plan—the first outline of a new constitution. In Randolph’s plan, a new Congress with two houses, whose members would be elected based on proportional representation reflecting the population of the various states, would replace the current Congress. The new government would represent the people, not necessarily 13 equal states. If more people lived in certain states, especially Virginia and Massachusetts, then those states would have more votes in the Congress. The Congress would have the power to levy taxes, regulate interstate commerce, and veto state laws. Randolph also proposed creating a “national executive” and judiciary, or a set of federal courts.
The next day, May 30, the delegates endorsed a resolution from Pennsylvania’s Gouverneur Morris that “a national government ought to be established consisting of a supreme legislative, executive, and judiciary.” The basic outline of a strong new national government—one that included the separation of powers between the Congress, the executive branch, and the courts—had emerged quickly. The new system that Madison, Randolph, and Morris were proposing was also known as federalism, a system of government in which both the central national government and the individual state governments had real power, but in separate spheres of influence. But there would be many days of meetings in a hot and stuffy Independence Hall before the details would be resolved and the Constitution itself would be completed.
From the opening day, there was a battle between those, generally from larger states, who wanted the new Congress to have proportional representation—that is, representatives elected directly by the voters of districts based on the size of a state’s population—and those, generally from smaller states, who wanted Congress to be made up of representatives of the states themselves, so that each state would have an equal number of votes. The Virginia Plan called for proportional representation, but a subsequent plan put forward by New Jersey’s William Paterson—not surprisingly known as the New Jersey Plan—called for a Congress in which both houses would be made up of delegates elected by state legislatures with an equal number from each state. While the delegates from the largest states, especially James Madison and Edmund Randolph, insisted that proportional representation was essential to a strong and democratic national government, Paterson, along with delegates from Delaware and surprisingly some from New York and Massachusetts, insisted that members of Congress should represent only state governments and that each state should be treated equally.
A compromise, first proposed by Connecticut’s Roger Sherman—and sometimes called the Connecticut Plan—was to split the difference and create a House of Representatives with members elected by districts based on population and a Senate made up of two senators from each state no matter what its population, elected by the state legislature. But adopting this Great Compromise, which was the key to the future Constitution, did not come easily.
Other issues were even more difficult to resolve. The convention came to a standstill over the office of president. Everyone assumed that the convention’s presiding officer, George Washington, would be the first president in the new government, but few could agree on the details of the office or on how to select his successors. Some
^8 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
wanted an executive of several individuals in a cabinet of equals, while others insisted on a single leader. Most wanted to ensure that only the “wisest and best” citizens voted for the president, and almost none trusted the people to elect the president by a direct popular vote. But how to select the president—by the Congress, by state legislatures, or by some other formula—seemed impossible to resolve until Madison proposed the Electoral College. He suggested that each state select presidential electors according to the number of its senators and representatives in Congress by whatever method it preferred, and that these electors would then select the president. If a majority of the electors did not agree on any one candidate, the choice would fall to the House of Representatives—but with each state delegation in Congress having only one vote. This proposal seemed like a compromise that could work. The convention also decided on a 4-year term for the president, with no limit on the number of terms that could be served.
There were many arguments about how much power to give the president. Delegates remembered that they had just fought a war against the tyranny of George Ill’s government. On the other hand, after a decade of chaos, they wanted a strong executive who could make tough decisions and have the authority to make them stick. Ihe delegates compromised and agreed that the president could veto legislation, but that a two-thirds vote of each chamber of the Congress could override a veto. Those wanting a strong executive won, though it would fall to Washington and subsequent presidents to flesh out the job.
Ihe delegates spent almost no time on the judiciary. They created a Supreme Court and lower courts but left the details to subsequent generations. While they considered an arrangement whereby the judges of the Supreme Court and the president together might declare both federal and state laws unconstitutional they dropped the idea. Only later, after John Marshall became chief justice in 1800, did the Supreme Court take on its role as arbiter of the constitutionality of laws.
Electoral College
A system in which each state selects presidential electors according to the number of its senators and representatives in Congress by whatever method it prefers, and these electors then select the president.
6.2
The Effects of Slavery on a Unified Government
While the convention spent much of its time debating issues that divided large states from small ones, Madison understood that the real divide was between northern and southern states, or more specifically, between states where slavery was growing rapidly and those where it was dying out. Later, he remembered that “the institution of slavery and its implications formed the line of discrimination” on many issues. Ihe existence of slavery in the United States embarrassed most of the framers of the Constitution. They were careful not to use the words “slave” or “slavery” even once in the final document. But they were equally careful to protect the institution and appease slaveholders.
Madison, like his fellow Virginians, Jefferson and Washington, embodied all the contradictions of slavery. Madison owned slaves, yet despised slavery. He told the convention that the “distinction of color” represented the basis for “the most oppressive domination ever exercised by man over man.” Nevertheless, he later assured the Virginia convention that ratified the Constitution that the Constitution offered slavery “better security than any that now exists.” He was right in his assurance.
Although many of the delegates, including some who were slaveholders, understood that slavery was incompatible with “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,” they were willing to live with the contradiction. The framers of the Constitution were also willing to live with slavery because of their belief that a key to securing life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness was ensuring the inviolable right of private property. Slaves were seen, first, as the private property of their owners and only second as human beings, if as humans at all. For many at the convention, all private property, including property consisting of other humans, was sacrosanct. Without the security of property, they did not think any of their other rights were
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 169
6.1
6.2
three-fifths clause
Another compromise from the Constitutional Convention by which slaves—though the term was never used—would be counted as three-fifths of a person for purposes of establishing a state's representation under the proportional representation plan.
secure. They were willing to sacrifice their moral qualms about slavery to protect their rights to their own property.
The first time slavery intruded into the convention was when the delegates argued about representation in Congress. If representation was to be by population, then who would be counted as people? Defenders of slavery wanted slaves to be counted in equal numbers with free citizens in assigning seats in the House of Representatives to states. Delegates from states where slavery was shrinking or gone wanted to count only free citizens. Pennsylvania’s James Wilson offered a compromise resolution, quickly seconded by South Carolina’s Charles Pinckney (who owned more slaves than almost any other delegate), which said that representation in Congress would be apportioned:
In proportion to the whole number of white and other free Citizens and inhabitants of every age sex and condition including those bound to servitude for a term of years and three-fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description, except Indians not paying taxes, in each state.
Everyone knew that “all other persons” meant slaves. After further debates, the final document kept the three-fifths clause.
Some delegates objected. Pennsylvania’s Gouverneur Morris condemned the three-fifths clause as creating a situation in which
the inhabitant of Georgia and South Carolina who goes to the Coast of Africa, and in defiance of the most sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from their dearest connection and damns them to the most cruel bondages, shall have more votes in a government instituted for the protection of the rights of mankind, than the citizen of Pennsylvania or New Jersey who views with laudable horror so nefarious a practice.
But in the end, the “nefarious practice” won.
Moreover, the three-fifths clause was far from the only concession to slaveholders. When a committee was appointed to start drafting a document, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney warned them, “If the Committee should fail to insert some security to the Southern states against an emancipation of slaves, and taxes on exports, I will be bound by duty to my state to vote against the report.” He need not have worried. The first draft of the Constitution included a clause that said Congress could neither tax nor prohibit “the migration or importation of such persons as the several States shall think proper to admit.” “Such Persons” referred to slaves, and the insistence that Congress could not tax or prohibit their “migration or importation” meant that the new government could not use its power in interstate commerce to limit the slave trade. However, the wording of the final draft did allow Congress to change the policy after 1808, and when that year arrived, Congress did end the slave trade and stop the importation of slaves from Africa. Nevertheless, between 1787 and 1808, over 200,000 Africans were forcibly taken from Africa and sold into slavery in the American South. In that one short 21-year period, half as many slaves were brought to the United States as the 400,000 Africans who had been brought to America over the previous 177 years between 1610 and 1787.
The final compromise about slavery came quickly. The draft of the Constitution f prepared by the Committee of Detail had said that each state had an obligation to “deliver up” any person charged with a serious crime in another state. Delegates from South Carolina and Georgia asked the convention to add a clause that required “fugitive slaves and servants to be delivered up like criminals.” Delegates from Pennsylvania and Connecticut objected. However, when it came time to vote, the convention embraced the request without a single dissent. It was the end of August.
The delegates were tired and anxious to end their work. And the issue of slavery was just not as important to northerners as it was to southerners. As a result, the final version of the Constitution contained a clause (Article IV, Section 2) that
'0 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
required states to extradite criminals from one state to another and a separate clause that stated:
No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of any Law or Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour, but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may be due.
Once again, the word slavery did not appear, but the meaning of “Person held to Service or Labour” was slaves.
The fugitive slave clause gave slaveholders a new and powerful tool. As the 1800s wore on, it led to increasing strife because many northerners resented it, and southerners became angry at northern slowness in complying with one of the planks of the Constitution that united them.
The delegates who met in Philadelphia in 1787 compromised on many issues— slavery most of all—but one area where they did not compromise, despite the pleas of several delegates, would bedevil them for some time. On September 10, only a week before their final vote, George Mason of Virginia said he wished “the plan had been prefaced with a Bill of Rights,” a guarantee of freedom of speech, press, religion, trial by jury, and so on, that would “give great quiet to the people.” Mason had been the author of the Virginia Declaration of Rights, and he anticipated that the lack of a formal guarantee of rights in the final document would create strong opposition. But not a single state delegation approved Mason’s proposal, though several states now had their own bills of rights. Some delegates argued that such guarantees were unnecessary, but more of them were hot, tired, and ready to be done with their work. It was too late to add something new, but the failure to include a Bill of Rights in the original document almost derailed the whole plan for a new federal government.
Forty-one of the original 55 delegates gathered for the final vote. Edmund Randolph who had introduced the Virginia Plan to the convention would not sign the final document. The Constitution gave far more power to the federal government than he ever imagined it would. George Mason worried about the lack of a Bill of Rights. Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts objected to the Constitution because, first, the three-fifths clause gave too much power to slaveholding states and, second, the power to raise armies was a dangerous step toward a military establishment. The remaining 38 were ready to sign the document that began with these words:
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
Many perhaps agreed with Benjamin Franklin, who said that there were “several parts of this Constitution which I do not at present approve,” but “the older I grow the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment and pay more respect to the judgment of others.” And, he added a realistic note, “I doubt too whether any other Convention we can obtain may be able to make a better Constitution.
Debating and Adopting the Constitution
As mandated by the call to the Constitutional Convention, once the 38 delegates had signed the draft Constitution, it was sent to the Congress that was meeting in New York. Ten of the delegates from the Philadelphia convention were also members of that Congress, and they transported the document. The delegates meeting in Philadelphia had far exceeded their instructions to propose amendments to the Articles of Confederation, but those members of the Congress who had not
6.2
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 171
Federalists
Supporters of the Constitution; those who favored its ratification.
Antifederalists
Opponents of the Constitution; those who argued against its ratification.
participated in drafting the new document were in no mood for a fight. They simply sent the proposed Constitution to the states for their consideration, even though they understood that it replaced rather than amended the Articles of Confederation and were aware that the Constitution itself stated the conditions for its national launch: ratification by only 9 of the 13 states. However, the members of Congress did require that the battles about whether to adopt this radical new experiment in government would be fought on a state-by-state basis in conventions of specially elected delegates who would choose to ratify, or not ratify, the Constitution. This approach would increase the power of the voters in each state to decide instead of representatives in the political bodies of the legislatures. In the fall of 1787, the outcome was by no means clear.
To ensure that the document they had worked so hard to create actually became the fundamental law of the United States, delegates from the Constitutional Convention quickly went to work. James Madison, one of the chief architects of the new Constitution, set out to persuade the state conventions to adopt it. In the fall of 1787, he, along with Alexander Hamilton and John Jay—three leaders who did not normally get along with one another—wrote 85 newspaper articles to support the Constitution, later published as The Federalist Papers. In these articles, the three argued passionately that the new nation needed a strong national government and described the problems that they believed the Constitution addressed.
The Constitution’s advocates, who called themselves Federalists, entered the state conventions with important advantages. They had a specific document and specific arguments on how theirs was a clear plan for improving the government. The new Constitution addressed the fears of many who would vote for delegates to the conventions and sit in them. For those afraid of another Shays’s Rebellion, for those wanting a strong U.S. Army to protect them from Indians along the Allegheny frontier, and for those worried about the nation’s credit rating, the Constitution provided reassurances not found in the Articles of Confederation.
In contrast, for those known as Antifederalists, people who worried that a strong national government would trample on the rights of sovereign states and the liberties of individual (white, male) citizens, the Constitution offered little to calm their fears. The Constitution, which lacked a Bill of Rights and shifted significant powers from the states to the federal government, provoked attacks by many who had fought hardest against British authority in the Revolution. Like many Antifederalists, Virginia’s Richard Henry Lee feared that a new “consolidated government” had been created and would be dominated by a “coalition of monarchy men, military men, aristocrats, and drones.” Ratification would not be easy.
The Pennsylvania legislature, which met upstairs in the same building as the one the Constitutional Convention had met in, ordered the election of delegates even before Congress officially sent the Constitution to the states. Although backcountry farmers in Pennsylvania resisted strong government in any form, the majority of delegates to the Pennsylvania convention wanted to ratify the document and, if possible, be the first state to do so, possibly securing the seat of the national government in Pennsylvania. But while Pennsylvanians debated, a convention in Delaware unanimously adopted the Constitution after only 5 days of discussion, beating Pennsylvania as the first state to ratify. Delegates to New Jersey’s convention who liked the idea that taxes on imports arriving through New York Harbor would now be paid to the federal government instead of to the state of New York also ratified quickly. They were joined by Georgia, which wanted immediate protection from Indian raids, and by Connecticut, which had a strong Federalist party. Decisions among other states got more difficult.
172 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
American Voices
James Madison, The Federalist Papers, 1787, and Patrick Henry’s response, 1788
6.2
James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay published their Federalist Papers as individual pieces in newspapers in the fail and winter of 1787- 7 788. Hamilton wrote 51 of them; Madison, 29; Jay only 5. Madison's were among the most articulate arguments for a strong federal government, including his argument in Federalist No. 7 0 that a national government would reduce the danger of a political faction trampling on the liberties of others. These articles were later collected as a book, The Federalist Papers, and remain one of the most often cited descriptions of the meaning of the new Constitution. But not everyone was convinced by the arguments put forward by the Constitution's defenders in the Federalist Papers and in the various state conventions. There was opposition to adopting the Constitution in almost every state. In Virginia, Patrick Henry, one of the Constitution's staunchest opponents, gave a stirring speech against the proposed new form of government. Where Madison placed his faith in a strong federal government, Henry trusted state governments as more accountable to the people and therefore more likely to protect their liberty.
James Madison, Federalist No. 10, November 22,1787
Among the numerous advantages promised by a well constructed Union, none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control the violence of faction....
A zeal for different opinions concerning religion, concerning government, and many other points, as well of speculation as of practice; an attachment to different leaders ambitiously contending for pre-eminence and power; or to persons of other descriptions whose fortunes have been interesting to the human passions, have, in turn, divided mankind into parties, inflamed them with mutual animosity, and rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other than to co-operate for their common good. So strong is this propensity of mankind to fall into mutual animosities, that where no substantial occasion presents itself, the most frivolous and fanciful distinctions have been sufficient to kindle their unfriendly passions....But the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property. Those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society. Those who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like discrimination. A landed interest, a manufacturing interest, a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into different classes....
A rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any other improper or wicked project, will be less apt to pervade the whole body of the Union than a particular member of it; in the same proportion as such a malady is more likely to taint a particular county or district, than an entire State.
In the extent and proper structure of the Union, therefore, we behold a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to
republican government. And according to the degree of pleasure and pride we feel in being republicans, ought to be our zeal in cherishing the spirit and supporting the character of Federalists.
Patrick Henry, "Speech against the Federal
Constitution," June 5,1788
Patrick Henry, a firebrand during the Revolution, spoke to the Virginia Convention called in 1788 to consider ratifying the Constitution. Although Madison tried hard to persuade him to support the document, Henry was adamant in his opposition.
Here is a resolution as radical as that which separated us from Great Britain....The rights of conscience, trial by jury, liberty of the press, all your immunities and franchises, all pretensions to human rights and privileges are rendered insecure, if not lost, by this change, so loudly talked of by some, and inconsiderately by others. Is this tame relinquishment of rights worthy of freemen? Is it worthy of that manly fortitude that ought to characterize republicans?...
Guard with jealous attention the public liberty. Suspect everyone who approaches that jewel. Unfortunately, nothing will preserve it but downright force. Whenever you give up that force, you are inevitably ruined....We are come hither to preserve the poor commonwealth of Virginia, if it can be possibly done: something must be done to preserve your liberty and mine.
The Confederation, this same despised government, merits, in my opinion, the highest encomium: it carried us through a long and dangerous war; it rendered us victorious in that conflict with a powerful nation; it has secured us a territory greater than any European monarch possesses; and shall a government which has been thus strong and vigorous, be accused of imbecility, and abandoned for want of energy?...
I am not well versed in history, but I will submit to your recollection, whether liberty has been destroyed most often by the licentiousness of the people, or by the tyranny of rulers. I imagine, sir, you will find the balance on the side of tyranny....
Before you abandon the present system, I hope you will consider not only its defects, most maturely, but likewise those of that which you are to substitute for it. May you be fully apprized of the dangers of the latter, not by fatal experience, but by some abler advocate than I!
Thinking Critically
1.	Documentary Analysis
According to Madison, what led to the emergence of political factions? Why did he think a strong federal government would limit the impact of factions?
2.	Historical Interpretation
Compare and contrast Madison's and Henry's views on the new Constitution. What do they tell you about how each man saw the challenges and dangers facing the new nation?
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 173
6.2
THINKING HISTORICALLY
James Madison vs. Patrick Henry
Madison said he wanted a strong national government because, while a political faction might capture a particular state, there was far less chance of such a group capturing the national government. Thus, he saw a strong national government as the best means of protecting liberty. In opposing adoption of the Constitution, Patrick Henry had the opposite fear, that a strong national government would not only be distant from the people, but would lead inevitably to a loss of "the rights of conscience, trial by jury, liberty of the press, all your immunities and franchises," which were best protected by state and local governments.
Thinking Critically
1.	Contextualization
Looking back over the story of the American Revolution and this chapter what sorts of liberties do you think Madison and Henry were worried about? Whose liberty was more—or less—important to them?
2.	Crafting an Argument
How did the proposed Constitution—without the Bill of Rights—protect or threaten liberties? Two hundred years later, whose fears do you think were more justified, Madison's or Henry's? Why?

nrn
In Massachusetts, the outcome was far from certain. Although reaction to the rebellion of western Massachusetts farmers had helped launch the Constitution, these farmers themselves sent delegates to Boston who did not trust “these lawyers, and men of learning, and moneyed men, that talk so finely, and gloss over matters so smoothly, to make us poor little people swallow down the pill,” as an Antifederalist delegate said. Two of the state’s most respected revolutionaries—Governor John Hancock, whose name was at the top of the Declaration of Independence, and Sam Adams of Boston Tea Party fame—believed that the Constitution sought to solve problems that were not serious and that the states, not the national government, were best situated to protect individual liberty. In the end, the Massachusetts convention adopted the Constitution by a close vote of 187 to 168 but only on the condition, as Adams insisted, that it be immediately amended to further protect the people’s liberties and the rights of state governments. The Constitutional Convention’s failure to add a Bill of Rights to the Constitution was already creating problems.
The next states to consider the document faced even more difficulties. The ratifying convention in New Hampshire adjourned without taking action. In addition, just as they had refused to attend the Constitutional Convention, the Rhode Island legislature refused even to call a convention. (They did, however, submit the question to town meetings in the state, and the voters rejected it, 2,708 to 237.) Maryland’s convention approved the document, but also called for 28 amendments to limit the power of the federal government. South Carolina approved the Constitution despite delegates’ fears about “the interests of the Northern states” and the federal government’s potential to limit that state’s “peculiar species of property” (slaves). Because of these fears, South Carolina’s convention voted for an amendment that would guarantee that states “retain every power not expressly relinquished by them.”
Virginia, the largest state in the Union, was divided. Madison and Washington were strong advocates for the Constitution. But others were not enthusiastic. George Mason worried about the lack of a Bill of Rights. Patrick Henry, perhaps the most respected Virginian after Washington, adamantly opposed the Constitution. His loyalty was to the sovereign state of Virginia. He was willing to be part of a loose federation of states, but only one that ensured that real authority rested with a government
174 Partlll A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
“ When opposite ^Bowling Qr&en, the president and members of Congress were discovered standing upon the fort, and the Ship instantly brought to. and tired a salute of thirteen guns, followed by three cheers, ushioh were returned by the Congressional dignitaries ^age
■MHMHMNWMNHmMM
As it became clear that the Constitution would be ratified and that the country would have a new and
stronger government, crowds celebrated. In spite of the strong opposition to the Constitution, once it
became law, most Americans supported it, though many also insisted that a Bill of Rights be added as
quickly as possible.
close enough to its citizens to ensure their rights. In the end, Virginia ratified the Constitution in June 1788, partly because its opponents were split among themselves. Virginia’s convention also demanded a Bill of Rights as soon as possible. With the vote in Virginia and a positive vote in a reconvened convention in New Hampshire earlier that same month, the Constitution was ratified, having reached its quota of nine states to support it.
Although enough states had supported ratification to launch the Constitution, no national government could thrive without New York. New York was already emerging as the financial center of the new nation, and the state sat in a strategic location between New England and the rest of the country. The New York convention debate was long and bitter. Alexander Hamilton led the charge for the Constitution, but Antifederalists were strong in New York. Given what was happening in other states, it would have been hard for New York to reject the Constitution, especially when many New Yorkers still hoped that the federal capital would remain in New York City. In the summer of 1788, the New York convention considered 55 possible amendments, a call for a second convention to revise the Constitution after its adoption, and a conditional vote that would ratify the document only /fit were amended. In the end, however, by a slim margin (30-27), New York ratified the Constitution in July 1788, the 11th state to do so.
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 175
The last states to ratify the Constitution, North Carolina and Rhode Island, made their choice only after the new government was already functioning. By the time they acted, there was no practical way for any state to remain outside of the new United States or its government. Refusing to ratify would have made a state a foreign government amid the formal United States. It remained for Americans to translate the document into an actual government and work out their complex relationships across divisions of class, race, gender, and degrees of freedom and nonfreedom as well as the extraordinary distances in geography and belief that separated them.
Quick Review What failures of the Articles of Confederation did the Constitution address?
CONCLUSION
With the end of the Revolution and the recognition of American independence, the government of the new United States now faced the same problem that had faced the British royal government in the past: how to pay for a war and how to govern a restive populace enjoying both the benefits and disappointments of their liberty. Officers in the Continental Army threatened to rebel when payment for their services was not forthcoming. Poor farmers, some of whom had served in the army during the Revolution and had never been paid, suffered because an influx of expensive imported goods that came with the wars end created an economic depression. Many began petitioning state legislatures for relief and resorted to rebellion when that approach failed. From New York and Pennsylvania to the Carolinas and Georgia, various Native American tribes challenged the new United States as white settlers streamed over the Allegheny Mountains into territory that the British government had kept off limits before the Revolution. At the same time, Congress began to resolve states’ claims to lands far into the interior, creating new states and territories for white settlers.
The issues of freedom and liberty that had rallied a new nation also took hold with slaves, and they and some white allies increasingly began to call for changes. Northern states, where slavery was less essential to the economy, slowly began to phase out slavery, but southern states, whose economic base depended on slave labor, were adamantly against emancipation and imported record numbers of new slaves. In addition, women in all levels of society began to expect more equal treatment and broader opportunities, particularly the right to education. Women’s expectations were translated in the male-dominated society to an ideology of Republican Motherhood in which women were expected to be better educated than their mothers and grandmothers but only so they could support the political development of their husbands and sons.
Many believed that at the core of many of the new nation’s problems was the fact that the governing document for the United States, the Articles of Confederation, was too weak a foundation on which to base a central government, in part, because it lacked the means to support itself through any kind of taxation. The Constitutional Convention that met over the summer of 1787 had been tasked by Congress to revise the Articles of Confederation. Instead, the representatives debated and designed a completely new Constitution, a very different document laying out a new form of government with three branches of government: an executive branch, including the president and cabinet; a legislative branch, consisting of two houses of Congress; and a judicial branch, including a Supreme Court. A key purpose of this design was to balance power, preventing one person or group from dominating the government while at the same time giving the national government the authority to act.
176 Part III A New Birth of Freedom—Creating the United States of America, 1754-1800
In many ways, the U.S. Constitution reflected the needs and aspirations of its creators—white men who were the elite of their society. Although the Constitution’s language never used the terms slave or slavery, the ideas and points within it upheld the institution, a benefit to many of the Constitution’s creators.
When the Constitution was presented to Congress for approval, Congress mandated that each state should call a special convention of delegates specifically elected to ratify, or not ratify, the document. As laid out in the body of the Constitution itself, a total of nine states would be needed to launch this new form of government. Throughout the states, debate was heated. Federalists and Antifederalists (supporters and opponents of the Constitution) took strong and contentious stands. Eventually, all states ratified the document, some by very narrow margins. No state wanted to be left behind on its own. However, no state found the document to be completely acceptable, and demands were strong to amend it immediately, particularly, by adding a Bill of Rights to protect all citizens. But by 1788, even before those changes were enacted and even before the last two states had ratified the Constitution, a new form of government for the United States was ready to be launched.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
Does the Constitution created in Philadelphia in 1787 embody or contradict the goals of the Revolution? Why?
Chapter 6 Creating a Nation 177
Chapter 6 Chapter Review
6.1
THE STATE OF THE NATION AT WAR'S END______________________
Explain how the outcome of the American Revolution affected different groups in the new United States.
Review Questions
1.	Historical Interpretation
What light do the Newburgh conspiracy and Shays’s Rebellion shed on the economic challenges facing the new nation at the conclusion of the Revolutionary War? What do they suggest about the connection between economic problems and political divisions during the period?
2.	Comparison
Compare and contrast the situation of African-Americans, both enslaved and free, in the northern states, the middle states, and the southern states in the decades following the American Revolution. What might explain the differences you note?
3.	Contextualization
How did revolutionary ideology shape ideas about gender roles in the late 1700s and early 1800s?
6.2
CREATING A GOVERNMENT: WRITING THE U.S. CONSTITUTION___________________________________________
Explain the needs, pressures, and compromises that led to writing and adopting the Constitution.
Review Questions
4.	Historical Interpretation
What role did economic issues play in prompting calls for the creation of a stronger central government?
5.	Crafting an Argument
Is it fair to describe the Constitution, as ratified in 1788, asa proslavery document? Why or why not?
6.	Contextualization
Why did Antifederalists view the Constitution as a threat to liberty? How did the experience of British colonial rule shape their views?
m new birth of Freedom-
-Creating the United States of America,


H
■B

President George Washington reviews troops at Fort Cumberland on the Potomac before leading them to suppress the Whiskey Rebellion. Frederick Kemmelmeyer, "General George Washington Reviewing the Western Army at Fort Cumberland the 18th of October 1794," after 1794. Oil on paperbacked with linen, 18 1/8x23 1/8. Courtesy of Winterthur Museum.
When New Hampshire and Virginia voted to ratify the Constitution in June 1788, it became the law of the land. But putting that new law into effect was not easy. The old Congress as well as local and state officials in the 13 states needed to conduct elections. Those elected to the new positions, as members of the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate and as the new president, would breathe life into the words of the Constitution and set precedents based on their interpretation of its meaning—or their preferences—that would last for generations. Different Americans, however, interpreted the Constitution differently. Americans discovered that they wanted the country to develop in diverse ways and began long-term arguments with one another about policy.
Soon after the new Congress was elected, it created and enacted the
Bill of Rights, 10 amendments that many thought should have been part of the original document. With this addition, more Americans felt comfortable that they had created a government that would protect their rights and maintain their freedom. Once elected as president, George Washington quickly set out to define this important American role. He appointed the first members of the Supreme Court and other judges and created a presidential cabinet to carry out the work of his administration. One cabinet member, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, laid the foundation for the nation’s economic system. Washington himself asserted federal authority and expanded the U.S. Army to win Indian Wars on the nation’s frontier. Washington’s vice president, John Adams, and his secretary of state, Thomas Jefferson, who would later become the next two presidents, worked together in this early government, but eventually became bitter rivals whose arguments represented different directions for the country.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVE
Demonstrate an understanding of how the federal government worked under the new Constitution.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
CONVENING A CONGRESS,
INAUGURATING A PRESIDENT, ADOPTING A BILL OF RIGHTS
Analyze the first federal elections and the adoption of the Bill of Rights.
CREATING AN ECONOMY: ALEXANDER HAMILTON AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC SYSTEM
Analyze the enduring argument begun by Hamilton's economic vision for the United States and the alternative vision of Jefferson and Madison.
SETTING THE PACE: THE WASHINGTON ADMINISTRATION
Explain the precedents set by George Washington's presidential administration.
THE BIRTH OF POLITICAL PARTIES:
ADAMS AND JEFFERSON
Explain the growing split between the Federalist and Democratic-Republican Parties, including how the French Revolution and the personal differences between Hamilton, Adams, and Jefferson affected American politics.
